READING
This section measures your ability to understand academic passages in English. 
There are three passages in the section. Give yourself 18 minutes to read each passage and answer the questions about it. The entire section will take 54 minutes to complete. 
You may look back at a passage when answering the questions. You can skip questions and go back to them later as long as there is time remaining. -'m .. 
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
WHICH HAND DID THEY USE? 
We all know that many more people today are right-handed than left-handed. Can one trace this same pattern far back in prehisto ry? Much of the evidence about right-hand versus left-hand dominance comes from stencils and prints found in rock shelters in Australia and elsewhere, and in many Ice Age caves in France, Spain, and Tasmania. When a left hand has been stenciled, this implies that the artist was right-handed, and vice versa. Even though the paint was often sprayed on by mouth, one can assume that the dominant hand assisted in the operation. One also has to make the assumption that hands were stenciled palm downward-a left hand stenciled palm upward might of course look as if it were a right hand. Of 158 stencils in the French cave of Gargas, 136 have been identified as left, and only 22 as right; right-handedness was therefore heavily predominant. 
Cave art furnishes other types of evidence of this phenomenon. Most engravin gs, for example, are best lit from the left, as befits the work of right-handed artists, who generally prefer to have the light source on the left so that the shadow of their hand does not fall on the tip of the engraving tool or brush. In the few cases where an Ice Age figure is depicted holding something, it is mostly, though not always, in the right hand. 
Clues to right-handedness can also be found by other methods. Right-handers tend to have longer, stronger, and more muscular bones on the right side, and Marcellin Boule as long ago as 1911 noted the La Chapelle -aux-Saints Neanderthal skeleton had a right upper arm bone that was noticeably stronger than the left. Similar observations have been made on other Neanderthal skeletons such as La Ferrassie I and Neanderthal itself. 
Fractures and other cut marks are another source of evidence. Right-handed soldiers tend to be wounded on the left. The skeleton of a 40-or SO-year-old Nabatean warrior, buried 2,000 years ago in the Negev Desert, Israel, had multiple healed fractures to the skull, the left arm, and the ribs. 
Tools themselves can be revealing. Long-handed Neolithic spoons of yew wood preserved in Alpine villages dating to 3000 B.C. have survived; the signs of rubbing on their left side indicate that their users were right-handed. The late Ice Age rope found in the French cave of Lascaux consists of fibers spiraling to the right, and was therefore tressed by a right-hander. 
Occasionally one can determine whether stone tools were used in the right hand or the left, and it is even possible to assess how far back this feature can be traced. In stone toolmaking experiments, Nick Toth, a right-hander, held the core (the stone that would become the tool) in his left hand and the hammer stone in his right. As the tool was made, the core was rotated clockwise, and the flakes, removed in sequence, had a little crescent of cortex (the core's outer surface) on the side. Toth's knapping produced 56 percent flakes with the cortex on the right, and 44 percent left-oriented flakes. A left-handed toolmaker would produce the opposite pattern. Toth has applied these criteria to the similarly made pebble tools from a number of early sites (before 1.5 million years) at Koobi Fora, Kenya, probably made by Homo hobilis. At seven sites he found that 57 percent of the flakes were right-oriented, and 43 percent left, a pattern almost identical to that produced today. 
About 90 percent of modern humans are right-handed: we are the only mammal with a preferential use of one hand. The part of the brain responsible for fine control and movement is located in the left cerebral hemisphere, and the findings above suggest that the human brain was already asymmetrical in its structure and function not long after 2 million years ago. Among Neanderthalers p A R A G R A p 2 of 70,000-3 5,000 years ago, Marcellin Boule noted that the La Chapelle-aux-Saints individual had a left hemisphere slightly bigger than the right, and the same was found for brains of specimens from Neander thal, Gibraltar, and La Quina. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
We all know that many more people today are right-handed than left-handed. Can one trace this same pattern far back in prehistory? Much of the evidence about right-hand versus left-hand dominance comes from stencils and prints found in rock shelters in Australia and elsewhere, and in many Ice Age caves in France, Spain, and Tasmania. When a left hand has been stenciled, this implies that the artist was right-handed, and vice versa. Even though the paint was often sprayed on by mouth, one can assume that the dominant hand assisted in the operation. One also has to make the assumption that hands were stenciled palm downward-a left hand stenciled palm upward might of course look as if it were a right hand. Of 158 stencils in the French cave of Gargas, 136 have been identified as left, and only 22 as right; right-handedness was therefore heavily predominant. 
1. It can be inferred from paragraph 1 that even when paint was sprayed by mouth to make a hand stencil 
A. there was no way to tell which hand was stenciled 
B. the stenciled hand was the weaker hand 
C. the stenciled hand was the dominant hand 
D. artists stenciled more images of the dominant hand than they did of the weak 
Cave art furnishes other types of evidence of this phenomenon. Most engravings, for example, are best lit from the left, as befits the work of right-handed artists, who generally prefer to have the light source on the left so that the shadow of their hand does not fall on the tip of the engraving tool or brush. In the few cases where an Ice Age figure is depicted holding something, it is mostly, though not always, in the right hand. 
2. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A.  Right-handed artists could more easily have avoided casting shadows on their work, because engravings in prehistoric caves were lit from the left. 
B.  The tips of engraving tools and brushes indicate that these instruments were used by right-handed artists whose work was lit from the left. 
C.  The best lighting for most engravings suggests that they were made by right-handed people trying to avoid the shadow of their hands interfering with their work. 
D.  Right-handed artists try to avoid having the brush they are using interfere with the light source. 
We all know that many more people today are right-handed than left-handed. Can one trace this same pattern far back in prehistory? Much of the evidence about right-hand versus left-hand dominance comes from stencils and prints found in rock shelters in Australia and elsewhere, and in many Ice Age caves in France, Spain, and Tasmania. When a left hand has been stenciled, this implies that the artist was right-handed, and vice versa. Even though the paint was often sprayed on by mouth, one can assume that the dominant hand assisted in the operation. One also has to make the assumption that hands were stenciled palm downward-a left hand stenciled palm upward might of course look as if it were a right hand. Of 158 stencils in the French cave of Gargas, 136 have been identified as left, and only 22 as right; right-handedn ess was therefore heavily predomi nant. 
Cave art furnishes other types of evidence of this phenomenon. Most engravings, for example, are best lit from the left, as befits the work of right-handed artists, who generally prefer to have the light source on the left so that the shadow of their hand does not fall on the tip of the engraving tool or brush. In the few cases where an Ice Age figure is depicted holding something, it is mostly, though not always, in the right hand. 
3. All of the following are mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 as evidence of right-handedness in art and artists EXCEPT 
A. the ideal source of lighting for most engravings 
B. the fact that a left hand stenciled palm upward might look like a right hand 
C. the prevalence of outlines of left hands 
D. figures in prehistoric art holding objects with the right hand 
Fractures and other cut marks are another source of evidence. Right-handed soldiers tend to be wounded on the left. The skeleton of a 40-or SO-year-old Nabatean warrior, buried 2,000 years ago in the Negev Desert, Israel, had multiple healed fractures to the skull, the left arm, and the ribs. 
4. Which of the following statements about fractures and cut marks can be inferred from paragraph 4? 
A. Fractures and cut marks caused by right-handed soldiers tend to occur on the right side of the injured party's body. 
B. The right arm sustains more injuries because, as the dominant arm, it is used more actively. 
C. In most people, the left side of the body is more vulnerable to injury since it is not defended effectively by the dominant arm. 
D. Fractures and cut marks on fossil humans probably occurred after death. 
Tools themselves can be revealing. Long-handed Neolithic spoons of yew wood preserved in Alpine villages dating to 3000 B.C. have survived; the signs of rubbing on their left side indicate that their users were right-handed. The late Ice Age rope found in the French cave of Lascaux consists of fibers spiraling to the right, and was therefore tressed by a right-hander. 
5. According to paragraph 5, what characteristic of a Neolithic spoon would imply that the spoon's owner was right-handed? 
A. The direction of the fibers 
B. Its long handle 
C. The yew wood it is carved from 
D. Wear on its left side 
6. In paragraph 5, why does the author mention the Ice Age rope found in the French cave of Lascaux? 
A. As an example of an item on which the marks of wear imply that it was used by a right-handed person 
B. Because tressing is an activity that is easier for a right-handed person than for a left-handed person 
C. Because the cave of Lascaux is the site where researchers have found several prehistoric tools made for right-handed people 
D. As an example of an item whose construction shows that it was made by a right-handed person 
Occasionally one can determine whether stone tools were used in the right hand or the left, and it is even possible to assess how far back this feature can be traced. In stone toolmaking experiments, Nick Toth, a right-hander, held the core (the stone that would become the tool) in his left hand and the hammer stone in his right. As the tool was made, the core was rotated clockwise, and the flakes, removed in sequence, had a little crescent of cortex (the core's outer surface) on the side. Toth's knapping produced 56 percent flakes with the cortex on the right, and 44 percent left-oriented flakes. A left-handed toolmaker would produce the opposite pattern. Toth has applied these criteria to the similarly made pebble tools from a number of early sites (before 1.5 million years) at Koobi Fora, Kenya, probably made by Homo habilis. At seven sites he found that 57 percent of the flakes were right-oriented, and 43 percent left, a pattern almost identical to that produced today. 
7. The word "criteria" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. standards 
B. findings 
C. ideas 
D. techniques 
About 90 percent of modern humans are right-handed: we are the only mammal with a preferential use of one hand. The part of the brain responsible for fine control and movement is located in the left cerebral hemisphere, and the findings above suggest that the human brain was already asymmetrical in its structure and function not long after 2 million years ago. Among Neandertha lers of 70,000-35,000 years ago, Marcellin Boule noted that the la Chapelle-aux-Saints individual had a left hemisphere slightly bigger than the right, and the same was found for brains of specimens from Neanderthal, Gibraltar, and La Quina. 
8. What is the author's primary purpose in paragraph 7? 
A. To illustrate the importance of studying the brain 
B. To demonstrate that human beings are the only mammal to desire fine control of movement 
C. To contrast the functions of the two hemispheres of the brain 
D. To demonstrate that right-hand preference has existed for a long time 
We all know that many more people today are right-handed than left-handed. Can one trace this same pattern far back in prehistory ? (A. ) Much of the evidence about right-hand versus left hand dominance comes from stencils and prints found in rock shelters in Australia and elsewhere, and in many Ice Age caves in France, Spain, and Tasmania. (
B. ) When a left hand has been stenciled, this implies that the artist was right-handed, and vice versa. (
C. ) Even though the paint was often sprayed on by mouth, one can assume that the dominant hand assisted in the operation. One also has to make the assumption that hands were stenciled palm downward-a left hand stenciled palm upward might of course look as if it were a right hand. (
D. ) Of 158 stencils in the French cave of Gargas, 136 have been identified as left, and only 22 as right; right-handedness was therefore heavily predominant. 
9. Directions: Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A. ), (
B. ), (
C. ), and (
D. ) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
The stencils of hands found in these shelters and caves allow us to draw conclusio ns about which hand was dominant. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C 
D. ChoiceD 
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. 
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
Several categories of evidence indic ate that people have always been predominantly right-handed . 
Answer Choices
[A] Stencils of right-handed figures are characteristic of cave art in France, Spain, and Tasmania. 
[B] The amount of prehistoric art created by right-handed artists indicates that left-handed people were in the minority. 
[C] Signs on the skeletal remains of prehistoric figures, including arm-bone size and injury marks, imply that these are the remains of right-handed people. 
[D] Neanderthal skeletons often have longer finger bones in the right hand, which is evidence that the right hand was stronger. 
[E] Instruments such as spoons, ropes, and pebble tools show signs that indicate they were used or constructed by right-handed people. 
[F] Nick Toth, a modern right-handed toolmaker, has shown that prehistoric tools were knapped to fit the right hand. 
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
TRANSITION TO SOUND IN FILM 
The shift from silent to sound film at the end of the 1920s marks, so far, the most important transformation in motion picture history. Despite all the highly visible technological developments in theatrical and home delivery of the moving image that have occurred over the decades since then, no single innovation has come close to being regarded as a similar kind of watershed. In nearly every language, however the words are phrased, the most basic division in cinema history lies between films that are mute and films that speak. 
Yet this most fundamental standard of historical periodization conceals a host of paradoxes. Nearly every movie theater, however modest, had a piano or organ to provide musical accompaniment to silent pictures. In many instances, spectators in the era before recorded sound experienced elaborate aural presentations alongside movies' visual images, from the Japanese benshi (narrators) crafting multivoiced dialogue narratives to original musical compositions performed by symphony- size orchestras in Europe and the United States. In Berlin, for the premiere performance outside the Soviet Union of The Battleship Potemkin, film director Sergei Eisenstein worked with Austrian composer Edmund Meisel (1874-1930) on a musical score matching sound to image; the Berlin screenings with live music helped to bring the film its wide international fame. 
Beyond that, the triumph of recorded sound has overshadowed the rich diversity of technological and aesthetic experiments with the visual image that were going forward simultaneously in the 1920s. New color processes, larger or differently shaped screen sizes, multiple-screen projections, even television, were among the developments invented or tried out during the period, sometimes with startling success. The high costs of converting to sound and the early limitations of sound technology were among the factors that suppressed innovations or retarded advancement in these other areas. The introduction of new screen formats was put off for a quarter century, and color, though utilized over the next two decades for special productions, also did not become a norm until the 1950s. 
Though it may be difficult to imagine from a later perspective, a strain of critical opinion in the 1920s predicted that sound film would be a technical novelty that would soon fade from sight, just as had many previous attempts, dating well back before the First World War, to link images with recorded sound. These critics were making a common assumption-that the technological inadequacies of earlier efforts (poor synchronization, weak sound amplification, fragile sound recordings ) would invariably occur again. To be sure, their evaluation of the technical flaws in 1920s sound experiments was not so far off the mark, yet they neglected to take into account important new forces in the motion picture field that, in a sense, would not take no for an answer. 
These forces were the rapidly expanding electronics and telecommun ications companies that were developing and linking telephone and wireless technologies in the 1920s. In the United States, they included such firms as American Telephone and Telegraph, General Electric, and Westinghouse. They were interested in all forms of sound technology and all potential avenues for commercial exploitation. Their competition and collaboration were creating the broadcasting industry in the United States, beginning with the introduction of commercial radio programming in the early 1920s. With financial assets considerably greater than those in the motion picture industry , and perhaps a wider vision of the relationships p A R A G R A p \\ .among entertainment and communications media, they revitalized research into recording sound for motion pictures. 
In 1929 the United States motion picture industry released more than 300 sound films-a rough figure, since a number were silent films with music tracks, or films prepared in dual versions, to take account of the many cinemas not yet wired for sound. At the production level, in the United States the conversion was virtually complete by 1930. In Europe it took a little longer, mainly because there were mor� small producers for whom the costs of sound were prohibitive, and in other parts of the world problems with rights or access to equipment delayed the shift to sound production for a few more years (though cinemas in major cities may have been wired in order to play foreign sound films). The triumph of sound cinema was swift, complete, and enormo usly popular. 
Directions: Now answer t he questions. 
Yet this most fundamental standard of historical periodization conceals a host of paradoxes. 
Nearly every movie theater, however modest, had a piano or organ to provide musical accompaniment to silent pictures. In many instances, spectators in the era before recorded sound experience d elaborate aural presentations alongside movies' visual images, from the Japanese benshi (narrators) crafting multivoiced dialogue narratives to original musical compositions performed by symphony-size orchestras in Europe and the United States. In Berlin, for the premiere performance outside the Soviet Union of The Battleship Potemkin, film director Sergei Eisenstein worked with Austrian composer Edmund Meisel (1874-1930) on a musical score matching sound to image; the Berlin screenin gs with live music helped to bring the film its wide international fame. 
11. The word "paradoxes" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. difficulties 
B. accomplis hments 
C. parallels 
D. contradictions 
12. Why does the author mention "Japanese benshi" and "original musical compositions"? 
A. To suggest that audiences preferred other forms of entertainment to film before the transition to sound in the 1920s 
B. To provide examples of some of the first sounds that were recorded for film 
C. To indicate some ways in which sound accompa nied film before the innovation of sound films in the late 1920s 
D. To show how the use of sound in films changed during different historical periods. 
Beyond that, the triumph of recorded sound has overshadowed the rich diversity of technological and aesthetic experiments with the visual image that were going forward simultaneously in the 1920s. New color processes, larger or differently shaped screen sizes, multiple-screen projections, even television, were among the developments invented or tried out during the period, sometimes with startling success. The high costs of converting to sound and the early limitations of sound technology were among the factors that suppressed innovations or retarded advancement in these other areas. Jhe introduction of new screen formats was put off for a quarter century, and color, though utilized over the next two decades for special productions, also did not become a norm until the 1950s. 
13. According to paragraph 3, which of the following is NOT true of the technological and aesthetic experiments of the 1920s? 
A. Because the costs of introducing recorded sound were low, it was the only innovation that was put to use in the 1920s. 
B. The introduction of recorded sound prevented the development of other technolo gical innovations in the 1920s. 
C. The new technological and aesthetic developments of the 1920s included the use of color, new screen formats, and television. 
D. Many of the innovations developed in the 1920s were not widely introduced until as late as the 1950s. 
Though it ma}I be difficult to imagine from a later perspective, a strain of critical opinion in the 1920s predicted that sound film would be a technical novelty that would soon fade from sight, just as had many previous attempts, dating well back before the First World War, to link images with recorded sound. These critics were making a common assumption-that the technological inadequacies of earlier efforts (poor synchronization, weak sound amplification, fragile sound recordings) would invariably occur again. To be sure, their evaluation of the technica l flaws in 1920s sound experiments was not so far off the mark, yet they neglected to take into account important new forces in the motion picture field that, in a sense, would not take no for an answer. 
14. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essentia l information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A. It was difficult for some critics in the 1920s to imagine why the idea of sound film had faded from sight well before the First World War. 
B. As surprising as it seems today, some critics in the 1920s believed that the new attempts at sound films would fade just as quickly as the attempts made before the First World War. 
C. Though some early critics thought that sound film would fade, its popularity during the First World War proved that it was not simply a technical novelty. 
D. Although some critics predicted well before the First World War that sound film would be an important technical innovation, it was not attempted until the 1920s.
15. The word "neglected" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. failed 
B. needed 
C. started 
D. expected 
16. According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true about the technical problems of early sound films? 
A. Linking images with recorded sound was a larger obstacle than weak sound amplification or fragile sound recordings. 
B. Sound films in the 1920s were unable to solve the technical flaws found in sound films before the First World War. 
C. Technical inadequac ies occurred less frequently in early sound films than critics suggested. 
D. Critics assumed that it would be impossible to overcome the technical difficulties experienced with earlier sound films. 
These forces were the rapidly expanding electronics and telecommunic ations companies that were developing and linking telephone and wireless technologies in the 1920s. In the United States, they included such firms as American Telephone and Telegraph, General Electric, and Westinghouse. They were interested in all forms of sound technology and all potential avenues for commerc ial exploitation. Their competition and collaborat ion were creating the broadcast ing industry in the United States, beginning with the introduc tion of commercial radio programming in the early 1920s. With financial assets considerably greater than those in the motion picture industry, and perhaps a wider vision of the relationsh ips among entertainment and commun ications media, they revitalized research into recording sound for motion pictures. 
17. In paragraph 5, commercial radio programm ing is best described as the result of 
A. a financially successful development that enabled large telecommunic ations firms to weaken their competition 
B. the desire of electronics and telecomm unications companies to make sound technology profitable 
C. a major development in the broadcasting industry that occurred before the 1920s 
D. the cooperation between telecomm unications compan ies and the motion picture industry In 1929 the United States motion picture industry released more than 300 sound films-a rough figure, since a number were silent films with music tracks, or films prepared in dual versions, to take account of the many cinemas not yet wired for sound. At the production level, in the United States the conversion was virtually complete by 1930. In Europe it took a little longer, mainly because there were more small producers for whom the costs of sound were prohibiti ve, and in other parts of the world problems with rights or access to equipment delayed the shift to sound production for a few more years (though cinemas in major cities may have been wired in order to play foreign sound films). The triumph of sound cinema was swift, complete, and enormously popular. 
18. According to paragraph 6, which of the following accounts for the delay in the conversion to sound films in Europe? 
A. European producers often lacked knowledge about the necessary equipment for the transition to sound films. 
B. Smaller European producers were often unable to afford to add sound to their films. 
C. It was often difficult to wire older cinemas in the major cities to play sound films. 
D. Smaller European producers believed that silent films with music accompaniment were aesthetically superior to sound films. 
These forces were the rapidly expanding electronics and telecommunications companies that were developing and linking telephone and wireless technologies in the 1920s. In the United States, they included such firms as American Telephone and Telegraph, General Electric, and Westinghouse. 
They were interested in all forms of sound technology and all potential avenues for commercial exploitation. Their competition and collaboration were creating the broadcasting industry in the United States, beginning with the introduction of commercial radio programming in the early 1920s. 
(A) With financial assets considerably greater than those in the motion picture industry , and perhaps a wider vision of the relationships among entertain ment and communications media, they revitalized research into recording sound for motion pictures. 
(B) In 1929 the United States motion picture industry released more than 300 sound films-a rough figure, since a number were silent films with music tracks, or films prepared in dual versions, to take account of the many cinemas not yet wired for sound. (C) At the production level, in the United States the conversion was virtually complete by 1930. (D) In Europe it took a little longer, mainly because there were more small producers for whom the costs of sound were prohibitive, and in other parts of the world problems with rights or access to equipment delayed the shift to sound production for a few more years (though cinemas in major cities may have been wired in order to play foreign sound films). The triumph of sound cinema was swift, complete, and enormously popular. 
19. Directions: Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A. ), (
B. ), (
C. ), and (
D. ) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
When this research resulted in the development of vastly improved sound techniq ues, film studios became convinced of the importance of converting to sound. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B
C. Choice C 
D. Choice D
20. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. 
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
The transition from silent to sound films was the most important development in film history . 
Answer Choices 
[A] Although music and speech had frequently accompanied film presentations before the 1920s, there was a strong desire to add sound to the films themselves. 
[B] Japanese filmmakers had developed the technology for creating sound films before directors in Europe and the United States began experimen ting with sound. 
[C] Because of intense interest in developing and introducing sound in film, the general use of other technological innovations being developed in the 1920s was delayed. 
[D] Before the First World War, film directors showed little interest in linking images with recorded sound. 
[E] The rapid progress in sound technology made possible by the involvemen t of telecommunica tions companies transformed the motion picture industry. 
[F] The arrival of sound film technology in the United States forced smaller producers in the motion picture industry out of business. Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
WATER IN THE DESERT 
Rainfall is not completely absent in desert areas, but it is highly variable. An annual rainfall of four inches is often used to define the limits of a desert. The impact of rainfall upon the surface water and groundwater resources of the desert is greatly influenced by landforms. Flats and depressions where water can collect are common features, but they make up only a small part of the landscape. 
Arid lands, surprisingly, contain some of the world's largest river systems, such as the Murray-Darling in Australia, the Rio Grande in North America, the Indus in Asia, and the Nile in Africa. These rivers and river systems are known as "exogenous " because their sources lie outside the arid zone. They are vital for sustaining life in some of the driest parts of the world. For centuries, the annual floods of the Nile, Tigris, and Euphrates, for example, have brought fertile silts and water to the inhabitants of their lower valleys. Today, river discharges are increasingly controlled by human intervention, creating a need for international river-basin agreement s. The filling of the Ataturk and other dams in Turkey has drastically reduced flows in the Euphrates, with potentially serious consequences for Syria and Iraq. 
The flow of exogenous rivers varies with the season. The desert sections of long rivers respond several months after rain has fallen outside the desert, so that peak flows may be in the dry season. This is useful for irrigation, but the high temperatures, low humidities, and different day lengths of the dry season, compared to the normal growing season, can present di fficulties with some crops. 
Regularly flowing rivers and streams that originate within arid lands are known as "endogenous." These are generally fed by groundwater springs, and many issue from limestone massifs, such as the Atlas Mountains in Morocco. Basaltic rocks also support springs, notably at the Jabal Al-Arab on the Jordan-Syria border. Endogenous rivers often do not reach the sea but drain into inland basins, where the water evaporates or is lost in the ground. Most desert streambeds are normally dry, but they occasionally receive large flows of water and sediment. 
Deserts contain large amounts of groundwater when compared to the amounts they hold in surface stores such as lakes and rivers. But only a small fraction of groundwater enters the hydrological cycle-feed ing the flows of streams, maintaining lake levels, and being recharged (or refilled) through surface flows and rainwater. In recent years, groundwater has become an increasingly important source of freshwater for desert dwellers. The United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank have funded attempts to survey the groundwater resources of arid lands and to develop appropriate extraction techniques. Such programs are much needed because in many arid lands there is only a vague idea of the extent of groundwater resources. It is known, however, that the distribution of groundwater is uneven, and that much of it lies at great depths. 
Groundwater is stored in the pore spaces and joints of rocks and unconsol idated (unsolidi fied) sediments or in the openings widened through fractures and weathering. The water-saturated rock or sediment is known as an "aquifer." Because they are porous, sedimentary rocks, such as sandstones and conglomerates, are important potential sources of groundwater. Large quantities of water may also be stored in limestones when joints and cracks have been enlarged to form cavities. Most limestone and sandstone aquifers are deep and extensive but may contain groundwaters that are not being recharged. Most shallow aquifers in sand and gravel deposits produce lower yields, p A R A G R A p "\• I • ., but they can be rapidly recharged. Some deep aquifers are known as "fossil" waters. The term "fossil" describes water that has been present for several thousand years. These aquifers became saturated more than 10,000 years ago and are no longer being recharged. 
Water does not remain immobile in an aquifer but can seep out at springs or leak into other aquifers. The rate of movement may be very slow: in the Indus plain, the movement of saline (salty) groundwaters has still not reached equilibrium after 70 years of being tapped. The mineral content of groundwater normally increases with the depth, but even quite shallow aquifers can be highly saline. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
Arid lands, surprisingly, contain some of the world's largest river systems, such as the Murray­Darling in Australia, the Rio Grande in North America, the Indus in Asia, and the Nile in Africa. These rivers and river systems are known as "exogenous" because their sources lie outside the arid zone. They are vital for sustaining life in some of the driest parts of the world. For centuries, the annual floods of the Nile, Tigris, and Euphrates, for example, have brought fertile silts and water to the inhabitants of their lower valleys. Today, river discharges are increasingly controlled by human intervention, creating a need for international river-basin agreements. The filling of the Ataturk and other dams in Turkey has drastically reduced flows in the Euphrates, with potentially serious consequences for Syria and Iraq. 
21. The word "drastically" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. obviously 
B. unfortunately 
C. rapidly 
D. severely 
22. In paragraph 2, why does the author mention the Ataturk and other dams in Turkey? 
A. To contrast the Euphrates River with other exogenous rivers 
B. To illustrate the technological advances in dam building 
C. To argue that dams should not be built on the Euphrates River 
D. To support the idea that international river-basin agreements are needed 
23. According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true of the Nile River? 
A. The Nile's flow in its desert sections is at its lowest during the dry season. 
B. The Nile's sources are located in one of the most arid zones of the world. 
C. The Nile's annual floods bring fertile silts and water to its lower valley. 
D. The Nile's periodic flooding hinders the growth of some crops. 
Deserts contain large amounts of groundwater when compared to the amounts they hold in surface stores such as lakes and rivers. But only a small fraction of groundwater enters the hydrological cycle-feeding the flows of streams, maintaining lake levels, and being recharged (or refilled) through surface flows and rainwater. In recent years, groundwater has become an increasingly important source of freshwater for desert dwellers. The United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank have funded attempts to survey the groundwater resources of arid lands and to develop appropri ate extraction techniques. Such programs are much needed because in many arid lands there is only a vague idea of the extent of groundwater resources. It is known, however, that the distribution of groundwater is uneven, and that much of it lies at great depths. 
24. The word "dwellers" in the passage is closest in meaning to A. . settlements 
B. . farmers 
C. . tribes 
D. . inhabitants 25. Paragraph 5 supports all of the following statements about the groundwater in deserts EXCEPT: 
A. The groundwater is consistently found just below the surface. 
B. A small part of the groundwater helps maintain lake levels. 
C. Most of the groundwater is not recharged through surface water. 
D. The groundwater is increasingly used as a source of freshwater. 
Groundwater is stored in the pore spaces and joints of rocks and unconsolidated (unsolidified) sediments or in the openings widened through fractures and weathering. The water-saturated rock or sediment is known as an "aquifer." Because they are porous, sedimentary rocks, such as sandstones and conglomerates, are important potential sources of groundwater. Large quantities of water may also be stored in limestones when joints and cracks have been enlarged to form cavities. Most limestone and sandstone aquifers are deep and extensive but may contain groundwaters that are not being recharged. Most shallow aquifers in sand and gravel deposits produce lower yields, but they can be rapidly recharged. Some deep aquifers are known as "fossil" waters. The term "fossil" describes water that has been present for several thousand years. These aquifers became saturated more than 10,000 years ago and are no longer being recharged. 
26. According to paragraph 6, which of the following statements about aquifers in deserts is true? 
A. Water from limestone and sandstone aquifers is generally better to drink than water from sand and gravel aquifers. 
B. Sand and gravel aquifers tend to contain less groundwater than limestone or sandstone aquifers. 
C. Groundwater in deep aquifers is more likely to be recharged than groundwater in shallow aquifers. 
D. Sedimentary rocks, because they are porous, are not capable of storlng large amounts of groundwater. 
27. According to paragraph 6, the aquifers called "fossil" waters 
A. contain fossils that are thousands of years old 
B. took more than 10,000 years to become saturated with water 
C. have not gained or lost any water for thousands of years 
D. have been collecting water for the past 10,000 years 
Water does not remain immobile in an aquifer but can seep out at springs or leak into other aquifers. The rate of moveme nt may be very slow: in the Indus plain, the moveme nt of saline (salty) groundwaters has still not reached equilibrium after 70 years of being tapped. The mineral content of groundwater normally increases with the depth, but even quite shallow aquifers can be highly saline. 
28. The word "immobile" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. enclosed 
B. permanent 
C. motionless 
D. intact 
Regularly flowing rivers and streams that originate within arid lands are known as "endogenous." These are generally fed by groundwater springs, and many issue from limestone massifs, such as the A. tlas Mountains in Morocco. Basaltic rocks also support springs, notably at the Jabal Al-Arab on the Jordan-Syria border. (A) Endogenous rivers often do not reach the sea but drain into inland basins, where the water evaporates or is lost in the ground. (
B. ) Most desert stream beds are normally dry, but they occasionally receive large flows of water and sediment. (
C. ) Deserts contain large amounts of groundw ater when compared to the amounts they hold in surface stores such as lakes and rivers. (
D. ) But only a small fraction of groundwater enters the hydrological cycle-feeding the flows of streams, maintaining lake levels, and being recharged (or refilled) through surface flows and rainwater. In recent years, groundwater has become an increasingly important source of freshwater for desert dwellers. The United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank have funded attempts to survey the groundwater resources of arid lands and to develop appropriate extraction techniques. Such programs are much needed because in many arid lands there is only a vague idea of the extent of groundw ater resources. 
It is known, however, that the distribution of groundwater is uneven, and that much of it lies at great depths. 
29. Directions: Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A. ), (
B. ), (
C. ), and (
D. ) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
These sudden floods provide important water supplies but can also be highly destructive. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C
D. ChoiceD 
30. Directions: Select from the five sentences below, the two sentences that correctly characterize endogenous rivers and the two sentences that correctly characterize exogenous rivers. Write your answer choices in the appropriate column of the table. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. Two of the sentences will NOT be used. 
Endogenous Rivers Exogenous Rivers 
Answer Choices 
[A] Their water generally comes from groundwater springs. 
[B] They include some of the world's largest rivers. 
[C] They often drain into inland basins and do not reach the sea. 
[D] They contain too much silt to be useful for irrigation. 
[E] Their water flow generally varies with the season of the year.
LISTENING
This section measures your ability to understand conversations and lectures in English.
Listen to each conversation and lecture only one time. After each conversation and lecture, you will answer some questions about it. Answer each question based on what is stated or implied by the speakers. 
You may take notes while you listen and use your notes to help you answer the questions. Your notes will not be scored. 
Answer each question before moving on. Do not return to previous questions. 
It will take about 41 minutes to listen to the conversations and lectures and answer the questions about them. Directions: Listen to Track 79. 0 Directions: Now answer the questions. 
1. Why does the professor ask the man to come to her office? 
A. To check on the man's progress on a paper he is writing 
B. To show the man techniques for organizing his time 
C. To encourage the man to revise a paper he wrote 
D. To clarify her comments on a paper the man wrote 2. Why does the man hesitate before agreeing to the professor's request? 
A.  He is not sure his effort would be successfu l. 
B.  He feels overwhelmed by all his schoolwork. 
C.  He is unclear about what the professor wants him to do. 
D.  He does not like to work on more than one assignment at a time. 
3. What is the professor's main criticism of the man's paper? 
A.  It included unnecessary information. 
B.  It did not include enough examples to illustrate the main point. 
C.  The main point was expressed too abstractly. 
D.  The paper ignored a key historical fact. 
4. Why does the professor suggest that the student change the introduction of his paper? 
A.  To make it less repetitive 
B. To more clearly state the man's point of view 
C. To correct spelling and grammar mistakes 
D. To reflect changes made elsewhere in the paper 
5. Listen to Track 80. 0 ® She understand s the student's problem. 
B.  She wants the student to explain his comment. 
C.  She did not hear what the student said. 
D.  She does not accept the student's excuse. 
Directions: Listen to Track 81. 0 Biology chromosome Directions: Now answer the questions. 
6. What does the professor mainly discuss? 
A.  How genes control human development 
B.  Why various types of human cells divide at different rates 
C.  How human chromosomes differ from one another 
D.  Why most human cells cannot keep dividing successfully 
7. The professor discusses research about the percentage of a chromosome's DNA that contains genetic information. How did she feel about this research? 
A.  She doubted its accuracy. 
B.  She was surprised by its conclusion. 
C.  She was concerned about its implications. 
D.  She thought it was unnecessary. 
8. What does the professor say about the DNA in a telomere? 
A.  It causes a cell to begin dividing. 
B.  It separates one gene from another. 
C.  It is genetically meaningless. 
D.  It has no function. 
9. Why does the professor mention shoelaces? 
A.  To point out that chromosomes are arranged in pairs 
B.  To describe the coiled shape of a chromosome 
C.  To illustrate how chromosomes are protected from damage 
D.  To explain how chromosomes are joined before dividing 
10. What does the professor imply about the length of the telomeres on a cell's chromosomes? 
A.  Longer telomeres allow the cell to divide more times. 
B.  Longer telomeres contain more genetic information. 
C.  Shorter telomeres are wound into tighter coils. 
D.  Shorter telomeres are less likely to break. 
11. According to the professor, how is the chemical telomerase related to the telomere? 
A.  It resembles the telomere in structure. 
B.  It helps repair broken telomeres. 
C.  It is produced at the end of the telomere. 
D.  It prevents telomeres from becoming too long. 
Directions: Listen to Track 82. 0 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
12. What is the lectu re mainly about? 
A.  Two competing theories of busi ness management 
B.  Tools that busine ss managers can use to improve the efficiency of their emplo yees 
C.  A method for busine sses to learn about the needs of their customers 
D.  A way that business managers can better relate to their emplo yees 13. Accord ing to the discussion, what is a potential drawback of MBWA? 
A.  MBWA provides information about the opinions of a small numb er of people. 
B.  MBWA can provide conflicting information. 
C.  Customers often are reluctant to shar e their opinions. 
D.  Customers may be annoyed about being observ ed while they shop. 
14. What does the profe ssor say about the relati onship between MBWA and market research? 
A.  MBWA is a refined version of a mark et research technique. 
B.  Market research information is more valuable than information from MBWA. 
C.  Information provided by MBWA complements information collected from market resear ch. 
D.  Busi ness managers should replace market research with MBWA. 
15. Why does the professor mention Dalton's soup and Elkin jeans? 
A. To illustrate that the success of MBWA often depends on the product involved 
B. To give examples of two companies that were resistant to trying MBWA 
C. To contrast a successful use of MBWA with an unsuccessful use 
D. To give examples of how the technique of MBWA is used in practice, Listening 
16. Why does the professor discuss the mayor of Baltimore? 
A. To explain the origins of the method of MBWA 
B. To demonstrate that MBWA can be useful outside the business world 
C. To provide an example of how MBWA can sometimes fail 
D. To give an example where market research and MBWA provide similar types of information 
17. Listen to Track 83. 0 
A. It is surprising that Dalton's tried to use MBWA. 
B. It is surprising that MBWA was successful for Dalton's. 
C. She does not have a high opinion of the quality of Dalton's soups. 
D. Dalton's positive experience with MBWA led many other companies to try MBWA.
Directions: Listen to Track 84. 0 Directions: Now answer the questions. 
18. What is the student's problem? 
A.  He missed the tuition due date. 
B.  He has not been paid. 
C.  His bank lost his paycheck. 
D.  His tuition payment got lost. 
19. What happened at the payroll department? 
A.  A new computer system was installed. 
B.  Information was entered into the computer system incorrectly. 
C.  Some employee information got lost. 
D.  Paychecks were distributed for the wrong amount. 
20. What does the woman imply about the people who work in the payroll office? 
A.  They did not realize they had a problem. 
B.  They are rather disorganized. 
C.  They had tried to contact the man several times. 
D.  They prefer to process checks manually. 
21. What will the student probably need to do to get paid? 
A.  Talk to the person who hired him 
B.  Go to the payroll department 
C.  Call the director of the payroll department 
D.  Resubmit the payroll paperwork 
22. How does the student's attitude change during the conversat ion? 
A. . From annoyed to appreciative 
B. . From frustrated to excited 
C. . From surprised to frustrated D. From appreciative to surprised Directions: Listen to Track 85. 0 Music History 
D. irections: Now answer the questions. 
23. What is the lecture mainly about? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] Some changes that took place in the early years of opera 
[B] Differences between opera and other forms of music 
[C] Italy's musical influence throughout Europe 
[D] Reasons that early French and Italian opera did not survive 
24. According to the professor, what happened after the Italian language replaced Latin in Italian opera? 
A. Operas became much longer. 
B. Operas began to express secular ideas. 
C. Music in opera became more complex. 
D. Opera was used to teach theology to the general public.
25. Why does the professor mention ancient Greek theater? 
A. To give an example of a culture that adopted opera from the Italians 
B. To describe the type of setting in which opera was typically performed 
C. To point out a precursor of opera 
D. To explain how opera was introduced into French society 
26. What does the professor say about music in French opera? 
A. It resembled sacred church music. 
B. It often inspired French novelists to write great pieces of literature. 
C. It revolved mainly around solo pieces. 
D. It was secondary to the rhythmic flow of language. 
27. Listen to Track 86. 0 
A. To show differences between English and Italian opera 
B. To give one instance in the evolution of opera 
C. To discuss the popularity of opera in England at the time 
D. To point out that English and Italian opera compan ies often worked together 
28. Listen to Track 87. 0 
A. He agrees with Chapman about opera and society. 
B. He thinks Chapman's approach to opera is confusing. 
C. He is concerned that Chapman's ideas are often misunderstood. 
D. He thinks Chapman's questions are difficult to answer.
SPEAKING
This section measures your ability to speak in English about a variety of topics.
There are four questions in this section. For each question, you will be given a short time to prepare your response. When the preparation time is up, answer the question as completely as possible in the time indicated for that question. You should record your responses so that you can review them later and compare them with the notes in the Answers section and scoring rubrics. 
1. You will now be asked to give your opinion about a familiar topic. Give yourself 15 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 45 seconds. 
Listen to Track 88. 0 Some people believe it's essential for a person's education to learn to play a musical instrument. Others don't believe music education is important. Which view do you agree with? 
Explain why. 
Preparation Time: 15 seconds 
Response Time: 45 seconds 
2. You will now read a short passage and listen to a conversation on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 89. 0 
Reading Time: 45 seconds 
College Radio Station to Undergo Major Changes? 
The university is considering making major changes to the college radio station. Changes would include an expansion of the station's broadcasting range, which would allow the radio's programming to reach nearby towns. One goal of the plan is to attract more students to apply to its communications program. Another goal is to provide the university with an extra source of revenue. University officials expect the enhanced radio station to significantly increase the number of listeners, which will in turn encourage businesses to place commercials on the radio. Listen to Track 90. 0 The woman supports the proposal described in the article. Explain why she thinks it will achieve the university's goals. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds 
3. You will now read a short passage and listen to a lecture on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 91. 0 
Reading Time: 50 seconds 
Subliminal Perception Humans are constantly perceiving visual and auditory stimuli. Sometimes our perception of these stimuli occurs consciously; we are aware of a stimulus and know that we are perceiving it. But our perception of a stimulus can also occur without our awareness: an image might appear and disappear before our eyes too quickly for us to notice that we saw it, or a sound might be too faint for us to realize that we heard it. This phenomenon-the perception of a stimulus just below the threshold of conscious awareness-is called subliminal perception. Experiments have shown that subliminally perceived stimuli can influence people's thoughts and attitudes. 
Listen to Track 92. 0 
Describe what subliminal perception is and explain how the experiment discussed by the professor illustrates this phenomenon. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds Response Time: 60 seconds 
4. You will now listen to part of a lecture. You will then be asked a question about it. After you hear the question, give yourself 20 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 93. 0 
Using the points and examples from the talk, explain how substitute goods and complement goods influence demand for a particular product. 
Preparation Time: 20 seconds Response Time: 60 seconds
WRITING
This section measures your ability to write in English to communicate in an academic environment.
There are two writing questions in this section. 
For question 1, you will read a passage and listen to a lecture about the same topic. You may take notes while you read and listen. Then you will write a response to a question based on what you have read and heard. You may look back at the passage when answering the question. You may use your notes to help you answer the question. You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. 
For question 2, you will write an essay based on your own knowledge and experience. You have 30 minutes to plan and complete your essay. ' -� .. 
Directions: Give yourself 3 minutes to read the passage. 
Reading Time: 3 minutes 
Jane Austen (1775-1817) is one of the most famous of all English novelists, and today her novels are more popular than ever, with several recently adapted as Hollywood movies. But we do not have many records of what she looked like. For a long time, the only accepted image of Austen was an amateur sketch of an adult Austen made by her sister Cassandra. However , recently a professio nally painted, full-length portrait of a teenage girl owned by a mem ber of the Austen family has come up for sale. Although the professional pain ting is not titled Jane Austen, there are good reasons to believe she is the subject. 
First, in 1882, seve ral decades after Austen's death, Austen' s family gave permission to use the portrait as an illustration in an edition of her letters. Austen's family clearly recognized it as a portrait of the author . So, for over a century now , the Austen family itself has endor sed the claim that the girl in the portrait is Jane Austen. 
Second, the face in the portrait clearly resembles the one in Cassand ra's sketc h, which we know depicts Austen. Though somewhat amateurish, the sketch com mun icates definite deta ils about Austen's face. Even though the Cassa ndra sketch is of an adult Jane Austen, the features are still similar to those of the teenage girl in the painting. The eyebrows, nose, mouth, and overa ll shape of the face are very much like those in the full-leng th portrait. 
Third, although the painting is unsigned and unda ted, there is evidenc e that it was painted when Austen was a teenager . The style links it to Ozias Humphr ey, a society portrait painter who was the kind of professional the wealthy Austen family would hire. Hum phrey was active in the late 1780s and early 1790s, exactly the period when Jane Austen was the age of the girl in the painting. 
Listen to Track 94. 0 
Directions: You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. Your response will be judged on the basis of the quality of your writing and on how well your response presents the points in the lecture and their relationship to the reading passage. Typically, an effective response will be 150 to 225 words. 
Listen to Track 95. 0 
Response Time: 20 minutes 
1. Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they respond to the specific arguments made in the reading passage. 
Directions: Read the question below. You have 30 minutes to plan, write, and revise your essay. 
Typically, an effective response will contain a minimum of 300 words. 
Response Time: 30 minutes 
2. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? 
It is better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject. 
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. Be sure to use your own words. 
Do not use memorized examples.
ANSWERS
Reading Section 
1. B
2. C 
3. B 
4. C 
5. D 
6. D 
7. A 
8. D 
9. B 
10. B, C, E 
11. D 
12. C 
13. A 
14. B 
15. A 
16. D 
17. B 
18. B 
19. B 20. A,C, E 21. D 
22. D 
23. c 24. D 
25. A 
26. B 
27. C 28. C 29. C 30. A,C B,E 
Endogenous Rivers Exogenous Rivers 
Their water generally comes from groundwater springs.
They include some of the world's largest rivers. 
They often drain into inland basins and do generally varies with not reach the sea.
Their water flow generally varies with the season of the year.
Listening Section 
1. C 
2. B 
3. A 
4. D 
5. A 
6. D 
7. B 
8. C 
9. c 
10. A 
11. B 
12. C 
13. A 
14. C
16. B 
17. A 
18. B 
19. c 20. B 
21. D 
22. A 
28. A
Speaking Section 
Prompts, Important Points, and Sample Responses with Rater Comments
Use the sample Independent and Integrated Speaking Rubrics in Appendix A to see how responses are scored. The raters who listen to your responses will analyze them in three general categories. These categories are Delivery, Language Use, and Topic Development. All three categories have equal importance. 
This section includes important points that should be covered when answering each question. All of these points must be present in a response in order for it to receive the highest score in the Topic Development category. These important points are guides to the kind of information raters expect to hear in a high-level response. 
This section also refers to sample responses, which can be found on the audio tracks. Some responses were scored at the highest level, which others were not. The responses are followed by comments from certified ETS raters. 
1: Paired Choice 
Prompt 
Some people believe it's essential for a person's education to learn to play a musical instrument. 
Others don't believe music education is important. 
Which view do you agree with? Explain why. 
Important Points 
When answering this question, you should take a clear stance and explain whether you think that music education or playing a musical instrument is important. You should provide at least one reason to support your point of view and you should explain that reason in detail. It is acceptable to list several reasons for agreeing or disagreeing with the importance of music education , but you should not simply make a list of reasons without providing any support or explanation for them. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 96. 0 
Rater Comments 
In this response, the speaker takes an interesting stance by disagreeing with both statements, though he expresses a clear opinion and gives support for that opinion. He believes that music education is important but not essential. He is able to give reasons for his point of view and support for these reasons. He speaks about people who "have gone through life successfully without having to learn a musical instrument." But he also mentions that learning a musical instrument can help with other skills, such as "logical thinking and math skills," and he references studies which have proven this point. He has some minor hesitations in his speech, but he is able to correct himself easily, and he is very easy to understand. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 97. O 
Rater Comments 
In this response, the speaker agrees that learning to play a musical instrument is essential. 
The general content of this response is very close to the high-level response, but this speaker does not express her ideas as clearly. She is able to list several reasons for her opinion, but her explanations are sometimes not well developed and therefore not clear ("It's very helpful to develop their brain also because they use in the tip of the fingers, for example, keyboard instrument"). Her pronunc iation is mostly clear and easy to understand, but her speech is not always smooth (she pauses frequently and uses words like "um"). Her word choice is sometimes inaccurate ("develop their emotional feeling"), and she makes small grammat ical errors, but she mostly communicates her point of view successfully. 
3: Fit and Explain
Prompt
The woman supports the proposal described in the article. Explain why she thinks it will achieve the university's goals. 
Important Points 
In your answer to this prompt, you should explain that the woman thinks the proposal to expand the student radio station will attract more students to the communications program and allow the university to make money. She thinks that more students will be attracted to the commun ications program because the proposed changes would allow the radio station to reach a larger audience, which will enable students to get real-life work experience and get better jobs when they graduate. 
She also thinks that the changes to the radio station will allow the university to make extra money by adding commerc ials. The extra money made from commerc ials can be used to offer more scholarships or to help fund other projects in the program. Note that it is not necessary to explain the technical aspects of expanding the broadcasting range of the radio station, as long as it's clear that the changes will allow the station to reach a larger audience. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 98. 0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker clearly explains why the woman thinks the plan will benefit the school. Both goals (improving job prospects for students and generating money through commerc ials) are addressed with an appropriate level of detail. The response is well organized, and makes logical connections between the plan and its effects ("the staff will have ... a better chance of getting a job, because it'll promote interacting with people that are not only students, but people who live in nearby towns.") The idea of expanding the radio station is implied rather than directly stated ("right now it is only limited to campus and campus students"), but this is acceptable for this particular item since the prompt does not ask the speaker to describe the plan. Although the speaker occasional ly pauses to think, he speaks for long, fluid stretches between pauses, using appropriate intonation to express meaning. He uses precise vocabulary and complex structures accurately throughout. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 99. O 
Rater Comments 
Although the speaker addresses all of the points and is understanda ble, vagueness and simple language keep this response in the middle range. 
For example, when the speaker says "more program would provide for opportunity for more students to have a real experience of what that is" the listener has to guess what "that" refers to. The speaker also tends to repeat things instead of elaborating on them. For example, after the sentence quoted above, he adds "and then they would have -get more jobs after they finish it because they get experience of doing it" instead of adding details like the fact that the station's wider range would allow students to work with a different type of audience. Sometimes the speaker's sentence structure limits his ability to express himself and make connections between pieces of informat ion. For example, in "they also get more money out of it because of the commercials," it would be better to say something like, "the radio station would also be able to earn more money because their wider audience would allow them to attract more commercials." 
3: General/Specific 
Prompt 
Describe what subliminal perception is and explain how the experim ent discussed by the professor illustrates this phenomenon. 
Important Points
In this question, you should describe what subliminal perception is, then discuss the specific information from the experiment and explain how it is related to the general idea of subliminal perception. Subliminal perception is the idea that people perceive an image or other stimulus even if they are not aware that they have experienced it. These subliminal perceptions can influence people's thoughts and actions. The professor describes an experiment in which people were subliminally exposed to different photos (an angry or a happy boy) and then shown a second photo of a boy with a neutral expression. Those who had seen the angry boy described the neutral boy negatively, whereas those who had seen the happy boy described the neutral boy positively. This experiment shows that because of subliminal perception, people were influenced by a photo they were not aware of seeing. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 100. 0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker gives a full response. She gives a brief definition of subliminal perception, then describes the experiment in more detail, with good accuracy. She also briefly connects the specific experiment to the general idea of subliminal perception. Although she has a prominent accent, her pronunc iation is clear and easy to understand. The response also progresses naturally from idea to idea, making it easier for the listener to follow. Occasional imprecise use of vocabulary or structure (for example, "people who were flashed with a stimulus") does not affect meaning. The speaker also uses self-correction effectively ("one group looked ... saw the picture ... the other group looked in ... looked at a picture"). 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 101.0
Rater Comments 
Overall, the speaker's pronunc iation is good. There is some hesitation at times in the response, but not to the extent that it creates unnecessary effort for the listener. The content at the beginning and middle of the response is good in general, but she is unable to control more difficult structures, resulting in unclear language and confusion ("One teacher was shown with in order to the people during the experiment to watch it just a little amount of time"). Also, although she attempts to summar ize the results and connect the experiment to the general idea, she does not describe how the people in the different groups reacted differently (i.e., that one group described the boy negatively and the other group described the boy positively), which is a major omission of the content. 
4:Summary 
Prompt 
Using the points and examples from the talk, explain how substitute goods and complement goods influence demand for a particular product. Answers 
Important Points 
In this item, you need to explain the ways the two kinds of goods-s ubstitute goods and complement goods-have an effect on the demand for particular products. You should use the examples of butter and margarine and of CDs and CD players to help explain the effect. Substitute goods are products that are similar enough to be interchangeable, so the price of one will influence the demand for the other. For example, margarine and butter are substitute goods, so if the price goes up for butter, then the demand goes up for margarine, which can be used as a butter substitute. Complement goods are those in which two products can't be used without the other, so the price of one will influence the demand for both in the same way. For instance, compact discs (CDs) and CD players are complement goods. If the price of CDs goes up, the demand will go down not only for CDs, but also for CD players. 
High-level Response: Listen to Track 102. 0
Rater Comments 
The speaker does a good job of explaining the two kinds of goods and of using the examples to explain how they each affect the demand. It is easy to follow the organization of her ideas and her pronunciation is mostly quite clear. She mispronounces the words "butter" and "margarine," but it is still possible to understand her response. While her grammar contains some minor errors, in other areas she is able to use fairly difficult grammatical constructions easily, such as "she stated an example ... saying that if the price of the CD goes up, then the demands for both the CD and the CD players will go down." There are a few hesitations during her response as she pauses to consider what to say, but they do not interfere greatly with the flow of her response. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 103.0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker does a fairly good job of explaining substitute goods and their effect on demand, but she runs out of time before she can finish talking about complement goods. She also never mentions the examples the professor gave. If she had not included an unnecessary introduction at the beginning-explaining that the professor is talking about economic theory in an economics class-she would have had a bit more time to finish discussing what the prompt required. Her speech also contains many hesitations, so listeners have to make an effort to follow her ideas. In addition, her response contains numerous minor grammatical errors, such as "one goods," "substitute of another," and "the two good." 
Writing Section 
Prompts, Topic Notes, and Sample Responses with Rater Comments 
Use the sample Integrated and Independent Writing Rubrics in Appendix A to see how responses are scored. 
This section includes topic notes that are guides to the kind of information raters expect to read in a high-level response. 
This section also refers to sample responses, which can be found on the audio tracks. These responses were scored at the highest level. The responses are followed by comments from certified ETS raters. 
Question 1 
Prompt
Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they respond to the specific arguments made in the reading passage. 
Topic Notes
The reading discusses a painting has been identified as depicting a teenaged Jane Austen, but the lecturer presents three reasons that cast doubt on the reading's support of this: 
Responses with scores of 4 and 5 typically discuss all three points in the table. 
Point made in the reading 
Jane Austen's family members authorized the portrait for use in the 1882 edition of her letters. 
There is a strong resemblance between Cassandra's sketch of Jane and the portrait. 
Although we don't know who painted the portrait, its style is like that of a painter who was active at the same time the Austen family might have hired him to paint a teenaged Jane. 
Correspond ing point from the lecture 
Although Jane Austen's relatives did authorize the portrait in question for use with an edition of her letters, so much time had passed since Jane died that none of them would have actually seen the teenaged Jane. 
The portrait could actually be of one of the many female relatives (for example, Mary Ann Campion) who may have resembled Jane, and who were teenagers at the time the portrait was painted. 
A date stamped on the canvas indicates that the canvas was sold by William Legg, who didn't begin selling canvas until Jane was older than the girl in the portrait. 
Sample Response 
The lecture casts doubt and questions the evidence presented in the reading passage regarding a painting allegedly of Jane Austen. 
First, about the family's recognition of the painting as that of Jane's as a teenager. The lecturer points out that in 1882, when the Austen f amily authorized the use of the painting as a portrait of Jane in the publication of her letters, Jane had been dead for 70 years. Hence, the family members who claimed this portrait to be of Jane's probably have never seen her, and don't necessarily know how she looked. 
While the reading passage presents the resemblance of the face features to prove that the teenager in the portrait is indeed Jane, the lecturer sees otherwise: the teenager in the portrait could have been any cousin or niece of Jane. The lecturer claims that there was much resemblance between the Austen family members; specifically he names Mary, one of Jane's distant cousins. 
Third, according to the passage the portrait was attributed to Humphrey. However, the lecture presents other evidence relating to the date of the portrait based on the stamp on the canvas itself. According to the stamp it was sold by William Legg, who didn't sell canvas in London when Jane was a teenager. He only began selling canvas in London when Jane was 27 years old. 
Rater Comments 
This response earns a score of 5. It is a well organized response that successf ully explains the opposing relationship between the reading and the lecture. The three main points from the lecture are clearly identified, and the writer has provided relevant details for each of those main points. One detail about the second point is presented with a minor inaccuracy-MaryAnn Campion is described by the lecturer as a niece, not a cousin, of Jane Austen-but overall the writer's coverage of this point is sufficient to achieve the highest score. The very few language errors in the response do not interfere with the clear presentation of the essenti al content from the reading and lecture. 
Question 2 
Prompt 
Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? 
It is better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject. 
Use specific 
reasons and examples to support your answer. 
Topic Notes This topic requires that you compare two approaches to knowledge. For either approach you choose to write about, you should present and develop reasons for preferring this approach. As you do so, it may be helpful to identify the particular aspect or aspects of your life in which you think your choice would benefit you most; for example, if you indicate that it is better to specialize, you could explain that this will help you economically (for example, if you are studying to be a doctor and choose certain areas of specialization, you will probably make more money than if you were a general practitioner). By the same token, if you indicate that it is better to take broad knowledge, you could explain that this will help you be a wellrounded person who can enjoy exploring many interests. If you believe that broad knowledge and specialization are equally important, it might be helpful to explain how having broad knowledge will be very useful in certain aspects of your life, while having specialized knowledge will be very useful in other aspects of your life. 
Sample Response 
To answer this question it seems to be necessary to make clear, for what aspect of life the knowledge in general should be good. On the one hand you might think that knowledge should be useful for the success in your job or at school. On the other hand you maybe understand knowledge as a part of the human existence , that allows us to think critically and to reflect about our life which includes the whole environment surrounding us. 
I want to respond the question from the second point of view. Knowledge has to be understood as much more than the ability to function in a special kind of business environment. Knowledge is the sum of all the theoretical facts and experiences a human being collects during his or her whole life. And from this position a knowledge as broad as possible must be accepted as the better alternative. 
I think that it will become a very big problem in our society when we continue to concentrate the whole educational system-especially the schools-only on teaching specific subjects. Of course it is actually is very important for young people to have the right preparation for the business world. But as I already said, life must focus on much more than the economic aspect. 
Even if you think that the preparation for the business world should be the main aspect of acquiring knowledge, you should still agree with the statement, because when you really analyse the requirements of work that are typical in our time, you will realize that the technologies and the methods change so quickly, that it would be a very big mistake to concentrate on a specific subject. You would always have the danger that if you concentrate on a specialized part of human knowledge, that part might become completely unimportant in the nearest future. Nowadays it seems to be useful to be able to program computers . Yet in some years computers might have the ability to program themselves. 
When you have a broad knowledge than you will be able to handle all the new things that you might get confronted with. And you will not only be able to handle them-but you will have the possibility to fully understand them and take part in their development . Not only as a passive part but as a creator of your own future. 
Rater Comments
The writer of this 5-level response argues in favor of having broad knowledge. The response begins by examining some different purposes of acquiring knowledge and identities different areas or aspects of life in which we use knowledge, and then goes on to acknowledge that while acquiring specialized knowledge is useful for success at work or school, it is the other type of knowledge, broad knowledge, which is best to have. In the beginning of the response, this writer has associated this type of knowledge with critical thinking skills. The writer then goes on to argue that if we decide to pursue specializ ed knowledge, there is the risk that it may become obsolete. The response comes back to the idea of critical thinking skills being most valuable after the writer has presented a scenario about what wo uld happen if somebody pursues the kind of knowledge that the writer is not coming out in favor of in this response. Although the concludi ng remark contains an error in structure, there are many instances of good facility with language use in the response.