READING
This section measures your ability to understand academic passages in English.
There are three passages in the section. Give yourself 18 minutes to read each passage and answer the questions about it. The entire section will take 54 minutes to complete. 
You may look back at a passage when answering the questions. You can skip questions and go back to them later as long as there is time remaining. , ,•c· Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN SCULPTURE 
In order to understand ancient Egyptian art, it is vital to know as much as possible of the elite Egyptians' view of the world and the functions and contexts of the formal art produced for them. Without this knowled ge we can appreciate only the formal content of Egyptian art, and we will fail to understand why it was produced or the concepts that shaped it and caused it to adopt its distinctive forms. In fact, a lack of understanding concerning the purposes of Egyptian art has often led it to be compared unfavorably with the art of other cultures: Why did the Egyptians not develop sculpture in which the body turned and twisted through space like classical Greek statuary? Why do the artists seem to get left and right confused? And why did they not discover the geometric perspective as European artists did in the Renaissance ? The answer to such questions has nothing to do with a lack of skill or imagination on the part of Egyptian artists and everything to do with the purposes for which they were producing their art.
The majority of three-dimensional representations, whether standing, seated, or kneeling, exhibit what is called frontality: they face straight ahead, neither twisting nor turning. When such statues are viewed in isolation, out of their original context and without knowledge of their function, it is easy to criticize them for their rigid attitudes that remained unchanged for three thousand years. Frontality is, however, directly related to the functions of Egyptian statuary and the contexts in which the statues were set up. Statues were created not for their decorative effect but to play a primary role in the cults of the gods, the king, and the dead. They were designed to be put in places where these beings could manifest themselves in order to be the recipients of ritual actions. Thus it made sense to show the statue looking ahead at what was happening in front of it, so that the living performer of the ritual could interact with the divine or deceased recipient Very often such statues were enclosed in rectangular shrines or wall niches whose only opening was at the front, making it natural for the statue to display frontality. Other statues were designed to be placed within an architectural setting, for instance, in front of the monumental entrance gateways to temples known as pylons, or in pillared courts, where they would be placed against or between pillars: their frontality worked perfectly within the architectural context. 
Statues were normally made of stone, wood, or metal. Stone statues were worked from single rectangular blocks of material and retained the compactness of the original shape. The stone between the arms and the body and between the legs in standing figures or the legs and the seat in seated ones was not normally cut away. From a practical aspect this protected the figures against breakage and psychologically gives the images a sense of strength and power, usually enhanced by a supporting back pillar. By contrast, wooden statues were carved from several pieces of wood that were pegged together to form the finished work, and metal statues were either made by wrapping sheet metal around a wooden core or cast by the lost wax process'. The arms could be held away from the body and carry separate items in their hands; there is no back pillar. The effect is altogether lighter and freer than that achieved in stone, but because both perform the same function, formal wooden and metal statues still display frontality. 
Apart from statues representing deities, kings, and named members of the elite that can be called formal, there is another group of three-dim ensional representations that depicts generic figures, frequently servants, from the nonelite population. The function of these is quite different. Many are made to be put in the tombs of the elite in order to serve the tomb owners in the afterlife. Unlike formal statues that are limited to static poses of standing, sitting, and kneeling, these figures depict a wide range of actions, such as grinding grain, baking bread, producing pots, and making music, and they are shown in appropriate poses, bending and squatting as they carry out their tasks. 
lost wax process: an ancient method of casting using a wax model and clay mold Directions: Now answer the questions. 
In order to understand ancient Egyptian art, it is vital to know as much as possible of the elite Egyptians' view of the world and the functions and contexts of the formal art produced for them. Without this knowledge we can appreciate only the formal content of Egyptian art, and we will fail to understand why it was produced or the concepts that shaped it and caused it to adopt its distinctive forms. In fact, a lack of underst anding concerning the purposes of Egyptian art has often led it to be compared unfavorably with the art of other cultures: Why did the Egyptians not develop sculpture in which the body turned and twisted through space like classical Greek statuary? Why do the artists seem to get left and right confused? And why did they not discover the geometric perspective as European artists did in the Renaissance? The answer to such questions has nothing to do with a lack of skill or imagination on the part of Egyptian artists and everything to do with the purposes for which they were producing their art. 
1. Paragraph 1 suggests that one reason ancient Egyptian art has been viewed less favorably than other art is that ancient Egyptian art lacks 
A. a realistic sense of human body proportion 
B. a focus on distinctive forms of varying sizes 
C. the originality of European art 
D. examples of formal art that show the human body in motion 
2. In paragraph 1, the author mentions all of the following as necessary in appreciating Egyptian art EXCEPT an understanding of 
A. the reasons why the art was made 
B. the nature of aristocratic Egyptian beliefs 
C. the influences of Egyptian art on later art such as classical Greek art 
D. how the art was used
The majority of three-dimensional representations, whether standing, seated, or kneeling, exhibit what is called frontality: they face straight ahead, neither twisting nor turning. When such statues are viewed in isolation, out of their original context and without knowledge of their function, it is easy to criticize them for their rigid attitudes that remained unchanged for three thousand years. Frontality is, however, directly related to the functions of Egyptian statuary and the contexts in which the statues were set up. Statues were created not for their decorative effect but to play a primary role in the cults of the gods, the king, and the dead. They were designed to be put in places where these beings could manifest themselves in order to be the recipients of ritual actions. Thus it made sense to show the statue looking ahead at what was happening in front of it, so that the living performer of the ritual could interact with the divine or deceased recipient. Very often such statues were enclosed in rectangular shrines or wall niches whose only opening was at the front, making it natural for the statue to display frontality. Other statues were designed to be placed within an architectural setting, for instance, in front of the monumental entrance gateways to temples known as pylons, or in pillared courts, where they would be placed against or between pillars: their frontality worked perfectly within the architectural context. 
3. According to paragraph 2, why are Egyptian statues portrayed frontally ? 
A. To create a psycholog ical effect of distance and isolation 
B. To allow them to fulfill their important role in ceremonies of Egyptian life 
C. To provide a contrast to statues with a decorative function 
D. To suggest the rigid, unchanging Egyptian philosophical attitudes 
4. The author mentions "an architectural setting" in the passage in order to 
A. suggest that architecture was as important as sculpture to Egyptian artists 
B. offer a further explanation for the frontal pose of Egyptian statues 
C. explain how the display of statues replaced other forms of architectural decoration 
D. illustrate the religious function of Egyptian statues 
Statues were normally made of stone, wood, or metal. Stone statues were worked from single rectangular blocks of material and retained the compactness of the original shape. The stone between the arms and the body and between the legs in standing figures or the legs and the seat in seated ones was not normally cut away. From a practical aspect this protected the figures against breakage and psychologically gives the images a sense of strength and power, usually enhanced by a supporting back pillar. By contrast, wooden statues were carved from several pieces of wood that were pegged together to form the finished work, and metal statues were either made by wrapping sheet metal around a wooden core or cast by the lost wax process. The arms could be held away from the body and carry separate items in their hands; there is no back pillar. The effect is altogether lighter and freer than that achieved in stone, but because both perform the same function, formal wooden and metal statues still display frontality. 
5. According to paragraph 3, why were certain areas of a stone statue left uncarved ? 
A. To prevent damage by providing physical stability 
B. To emphasize that the material was as important as the figure itself 
C. To emphasize that the figure was not meant to be a real human being 
D. To provide another artist with the chance to finish the carving 
6. According to paragraph 3, which of the following statements about wooden statues is true? 
A. Wooden statues were usually larger than stone statues. 
B. Wooden statues were made from a single piece of wood.
C. Wooden statues contained pieces of metal or stone attached to the front.
D. Wooden statues had a different effect on the viewer than stone statues.
Apart from statues representing deities, kings, and named members of the elite that can be called formal, there is another group of three-di mensional representations that depicts generic figures, frequently servants, from the nonelite population. The function of these is quite different, Many are made to be put in the tombs of the elite in order to serve the tomb owners in the afterlife. Unlike formal statues that are limited to static poses of standing, sitting, and kneeling, these figures depict a wide range of actions, such as grinding grain, baking bread, producing pots, and making music, and they are shown in appropriate poses, bending and squatting as they carry out their tasks. 
7. The word "depicts" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. imagines 
B. classifies 
C. elevates 
D. portrays 
8. According to paragraph 4, what is the difference between statues that represent the Egyptian elite and statues that represent the nonelite classes? 
A. Statues of the elite are included in tombs, but statues of the nonelite are not, 
B. Statues of the elite are in motionless poses, while statues of the nonelite are in active poses. 
C. Statues of the elite are shown standing, while statues of the nonelite are shown sitting or kneeling. 
D. Statues of the elite serve an important function, while statues of the nonelite are decorative.
Apart from statues representing deities, kings, and named members of the elite that can be called formal, there is another group of three-dimensional representations that depicts generic figures, frequent ly servants, from the nonelite population. (A) The function of these is quite different. (B) Many are made to be put in the tombs of the elite in order to serve the tomb owners in the afterlife. (C) Unlike formal statues that are limited to static poses of standing, sitting, and kneeling, these figures depict a wide range of actions, such as grinding grain, baking bread, producing pots, and making music, and they are shown in appropria te poses, bending and squatting as they carry out their tasks. (D) 
9. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A}, (B), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added.
In fact, it is the action and not the figure itself that is important. 
Where would the sentence best fit?
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B
C. Choice C
D. Choice D
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
The distinctive look of ancient Egyptian sculpture was determined largely by its function 
Answer Choices 
[A] The twisted forms of Egyptian statues indicate their importance in ritual actions. 
[B] The reason Egyptian statues are motionless is linked to their central role in cultural rituals. 
[C] Stone, wood, and metal statues all display the feature of frontality. 
[D] Statues were more often designed to be viewed in isolation rather than placed within buildings. 
[E] The contrasting poses used in statues of elite and nonelite Egyptians reveal their difference in social status. 
[F] Although the appearances of formal and generic statues differ, they share the same function. 
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
ORIENTATION AND NAVIGATION
To South Americans, robins are birds that fly north every spring. To North Americans, the robins simply vacation in the south each winter. Furtherm ore, they fly to very specific places in South America and will often come back to the same trees in North American yards the following spring. The question is not why they would leave the cold of winter so much as how they find their way around. The question perplexed people for years, until, in the 1950s, a German scientist named Gustave Kramer provided some answers and, in the process, raised new questions. 
Kramer initiated important new kinds of research regarding how animals orient and navigate. Orientation is simply facing in the right direction; navigation involves finding one's way from point A to point B. 
Early in his research, Kramer found that caged migratory birds became very restless at about the time they would normally have begun migration in the wild. Furthermore, he noticed that as they fluttered around in the cage, they often launched themselves in the direction of their normal migratory route. He then set up experiments with caged starlings and found that their orientation was, in fact, in the proper migratory direction except when the sky was overcast, at which times there was no clear direction to their restless movements. Kramer surmised, therefore, that they were orienting according to the position of the Sun. To test this idea, he blocked their view of the Sun and used mirrors to change its apparent position. He found that under these circumstances, the birds oriented with respect to the new "Sun." They seemed to be using the Sun as a compass to determine direction. At the time, this idea seemed preposterous. How could a bird navigate by the Sun when some of us lose our way with road maps? Obviously, more testing was in order. 
So, in another set of experim ents, Kramer put identical food boxes around the cage, with food in only one of the boxes. The boxes were stationary, and the one containing food was always at the same point of the compass. However, its position with respect to the surroundin gs could be changed by revolving either the inner cage containing the birds or the outer walls, which served as the background. As long as the birds could see the Sun, no matter how their surround ings were altered, they went directly to the correct food box. Whether the box appeared in front of the right wall or the left wall, they showed no signs of confusion. On overcast days, however, the birds were disoriented and had trouble locating their food box. 
In experimenting with artificial suns, Kramer made another interesting discovery. If the artificial Sun remained stationary, the birds would shift their direction with respect to it at a rate of about 15 degrees per hour, the Sun's rate of movement across the sky. Apparently, the birds were assuming that the "Sun" they saw was moving at that rate. When the real Sun was visible, however, the birds maintained a constant direction as it moved across the sky. In other words, they were able to compensate for the Sun's movement. This meant that some sort of biological clock was operating­and a very precise clock at that. 
What about birds that migrate at night? Perhaps they navigate by the night sky. To test the idea, caged night-mig rating birds were placed on the floor of a planetarium during their migratory period. A planetarium is essentia lly a theater with a domelike ceiling onto which a night sky can be projected for any night of the year. When the planetarium sky matched the sky outside, the birds fluttered in the direction of their normal migration. But when the dome was rotated, the birds 3 . "it' changed their direction to match the artificial sky. The results clearly indicated that the birds were orienting according to the stars. 
There is accumulating evidence indicating that birds navigate by using a wide variety of environmental cues. Other areas under investigation include magnetism, landmarks, coastlines, sonar, and even smells. The studies are complicated by the fact that the data are sometimes contradictory and the mechanisms apparently change from time to time. Furthermore, one sensory ability may back up another. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
Early in his research, Kramer found that caged migratory birds became very restless at about the time they would normally have begun migration in the wild. Furthermore, he noticed that as they fluttered around in the cage, they often launched themselves in the direction of their normal migratory route. He then set up experime nts with caged starlings and found that their orientation was, in fact, in the proper migratory direction except when the sky was overcast, at which times there was no clear direction to their restless movements. Kramer surmised, therefore, that they were orienting according to the position of the Sun. To test this idea, he blocked their view of the Sun and used mirrors to change its apparent position. He found that under these circumstances, the birds oriented with respect to the new "Sun." They seemed to be using the Sun as a compass to determine direction. At the time, this idea seemed preposterous. How could a bird navigate by the Sun when some of us lose our way with road maps? Obviously, more testing was in order. 
11. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A. Experiments revealed that caged starlings displayed a lack of directional sense and restless movements. 
B. Experiments revealed that caged starlings were unable to orient themselves in the direction of their normal migratory route. 
C. Experiments revealed that the restless movement of caged starlings had no clear direction. 
D. Experiments revealed that caged starlings' orientation was accurate unless the weather was overcast. 
12. According to paragraph 3, why did Kramer use mirrors to change the apparent position of the Sun? 
A. To test the effect of light on the birds' restlessness 
B. To test whether birds were using the Sun to navigate 
C. To simulate the shifting of light the birds would encounter along their regular migratory route 
D. To cause the birds to migrate at a different time than they would in the wild
13. According to paragraph 3, when do caged starlings become restless? 
A. When the weather is overcast 
B. When they are unable to identify their normal migratory route 
C. When their normal time for migration arrives 
D. When mirrors are used to change the apparent position of the Sun 
So, in another set of experiments, Kramer put identical food boxes around the cage, with food in only one of the boxes. The boxes were stationary, and the one containing food was always at the same point of the compass. However, its position with respect to the surroundings could be changed by revolving either the inner cage containing the birds or the outer walls, which served as the background. As long as the birds could see the Sun, no matter how their surroundings were altered, they went directly to the correct food box. Whether the box appeared in front of the right wall or the left wall, they showed no signs of confusion. On overcast days, however, the birds were disoriented and had trouble locating their food box. 
14. Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 4 about Kramer's reason for filling one food box and leaving the rest empty? 
A. He believed the birds would eat food from only one box. 
B. He wanted to see whether the Sun alone controlled the birds' ability to navigate toward the box with food. 
C. He thought that if all the boxes contained food, this would distract the birds from following their migratory route. 
D. He needed to test whether the birds preferred having the food at any particular point of the compass. 
In experime nting with artificial suns, Kramer made another interesting discovery. If the artificial Sun remained stationary, the birds would shift their direction with respect to it at a rate of about 15 degrees per hour, the Sun's rate of movement across the sky. Apparently, the birds were assuming that the "Sun" they saw was moving at that rate. When the real Sun was visible, however, the birds maintained a constant direction as it moved across the sky. In other words, they were able to compensate for the Sun's moveme nt. This meant that some sort of biological clock was operating-and a very precise clock at that. 
15. According to paragraph 5, how did the birds fly when the real Sun was visible? 
A. They kept the direction of their flight constant. 
B. They changed the direction of their flight at a rate of 15 degrees per hour. 
C. They kept flying toward the Sun. 
D. They flew in the same direction as the birds that were seeing the artificial Sun. 
16. The experim ent described in paragraph 5 caused Kramer to conclude that birds possess a biological clock because 
A. when birds navigate they are able to compensate for the changing position of the Sun in the sky 
B. birds' innate bearings keep them oriented in a direction that is within 15 degrees of the Sun's direction 
C. birds' migration is triggered by natural environmental cues, such as the position of the Sun 
D. birds shift their direction at a rate of 15 degrees per hour whether the Sun is visible or not 
What about birds that migrate at night? Perhaps they navigate by the night sky. To test the idea, caged night-migrating birds were placed on the floor of a planetarium during their migratory period. A planetarium is essentially a theater with a domelike ceiling onto which a night sky can be projected for any night of the year. When the planetarium sky matched the sky outside, the birds fluttered in the direction of their normal migration. But when the dome was rotated, the birds changed their direction to match the artificial sky. The results clearly indicated that the birds were orienting according to the stars. 
17. According to paragraph 6, how did the birds navigate in the planetarium's nighttime environment? 
A. By waiting for the dome to stop rotating 
B. By their position on the planetarium floor 
C. By orienting themselves to the stars in the artificial night sky 
D. By navigating randomly until they found the correct orientation 
There is accumulat ing evidence indicating that birds navigate by using a wide variety of environmental cues. Other areas under investigation include magnetism, landmarks, coastlines, sonar, and even smells. The studies are complicated by the fact that the data are sometimes contrad ictory and the mechan isms apparently change from time to time. Furthermor e, one sensory ability may back up another. 
18. The word "accumula ting" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. new 
B. increasing 
C. convincing 
D. extensive 
So, in another set of experiments, Kramer put identical food boxes around the cage, with food in only one of the boxes. (A) The boxes were stationary, and the one containing food was always at the same point of the compass. (B) However, its position with respect to the surroundings could be changed by revolving either the inner cage containing the birds or the outer walls, which served as the background. (C) As long as the birds could see the Sun, no matter how their surroundings were altered, they went directly to the correct food box. (D) Whether the box appeared in front of the right wall or the left wall, they showed no signs of confusion. On overcast days, however, the birds were disoriented and had trouble locating their food box. 19. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (8), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
He arranged the feed boxes at various positions on a compass. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C
D. Choice D 
20. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. 
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
Gustave Kramer conducted important research related to the ability of birds to orient and navigate . 
Answer Choices 
[A] Because caged birds become disoriented when the sky is overcast, Kramer hypothesized that birds orient themselves according to the Sun's position. 
[B] In one set of experiments, Kramer placed the box containing food at the same point of the compass each time he put food boxes in the birds' environment. 
[C] Kramer demonstrated that an internal biological clock allows birds to compensate for the Sun's movement. 
[D] After several studies, Kramer surmised that an internal biological clock allows some species of birds to navigate at night. 
[E] The role of environment al cues in birds' navigation is clear, for on overcast days, birds use objects besides the Sun to orient themselves. 
[F] Kramer showed that night-mi grating birds use the sky to navigate by the stars. Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
SEVE NTEENTH-CENTUR YEUROPEAN ECONOMIC GROWTH 
In the late sixteenth century and into the seventeent h, Europe continued the growth that had lifted it out of the relatively less prosperous medieval period (from the mid 400s to the late 1400s). Among the key factors behind this growth were increased agricultural productivity and an expansion of trade. 
Populations cannot grow unless the rural economy can produce enough additional food to feed more people. During the sixteenth century, farmers brought more land into cultivation at the expense of forests and fens (low-lying wetlands). Dutch land reclamation in the Netherlands in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries provides the most spectacular example of the expansion of farmland: the Dutch reclaimed more than 36,000 acres from 1590 to 1615 alone. 
Much of the potential for European economic development lay in what at first glance would seem to have been only sleepy villages. Such villages, however, generally lay in regions of relatively advanced agricultural production, permitting not only the survival of peasants but also the accumulation of an agricultural surplus for investment. They had access to urban merchants, markets, and trade routes. 
Increased agricultural production in turn facilitated rural industry, an intrinsic part of the expansion of industry . Woolens and textile manufacturers, in particular, utilized rural cottage (in-home) production, which took advantage of cheap and plentiful rural labor. In the German states, the ravages of the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648) further moved textile production into the countryside . Members of poor peasant families spun or wove cloth and linens at home for scant remuneration in an attempt to supplement meager family income. 
More extended trading networks also helped develop Europe's economy in this period. 
English and Dutch ships carrying rye from the Baltic states reached Spain and Portugal. Population growth generated an expansion of small-scale manufac turing, particularly of handicrafts, textiles, and metal production in England, Flanders, parts of northern Italy, the southwestern German states, and parts of Spain. Only iron smelting and mining required marshaling a significant amount of capital (wealth invested to create more wealth). 
The development of banking and other financial services contributed to the expansion of trade. By the middle of the sixteenth century, financiers and traders commonly accepted bills of exchange in place of gold or silver for other goods. Bills of exchange, which had their origins in medieval Italy, were promissory notes (written promises to pay a specified amount of money by a certain date) that could be sold to third parties. In this way, they provided credit. At mid-century, an Antwerp financier only slightly exagg erated when he claimed, "One can no more trade without bills of exchange than sail without water." Merchants no longer had to carry gold and silver over long, dangerous journeys. An Amsterdam merchant purchasing soap from a merchant in Marseille could go to an exchanger and pay the exchanger the equivalent sum in guilders, the Dutch currency. The exchanger would then send a bill of exchange to a colleague in Marseille, authorizing the colleague to pay the Marseille merchant in the merchant's own currency after the actual exchange of goods had taken place. 
Bills of exchange contributed to the development of banks, as exchangers began to provide loans. Not until the eighteenth century, however, did such banks as the Bank of Amsterdam and the Bank of England begin to provide capital for business investment. Their principal function was to provide funds for the state. 
The rapid expansion in international trade also benefitted from an infusion of capital, stemming largely from gold and silver brought by Spanish vessels from the Americas. This capital financed the production of goods, storage, trade, and even credit across Europe and overseas. Moreover, an increased credit supply was generated by investments and loans by bankers and wealthy merchants to states and by joint-stock partners hips-an English innovation (the first major company began in 1600). Unlike short-term financial cooperation between investors for a single commercial undertaking, joint-stock companies provided permanent funding of capital by drawing on the investments of merchants and other investors who purchased shares in the company. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
In the late sixteenth century and into the seventeenth, Europe continued the growth that had lifted it out of the relatively less prosperous medieval period (from the mid 400s to the late 1400s). Among the key factors behind this growth were increased agricultural productivity and an expansion of trade. 
21. According to paragraph 1, what was true of Europe during the medieval period? 
A. Agricultural productivity declined. 
B. There was relatively little economic growth. 
C. The general level of prosperity declined. 
D. Foreign trade began to play an important role in the economy. 
Populations cannot grow unless the rural economy can produce enough additional food to feed more people. Du ring the sixteenth century, farmers brought more land into cultivation at the expense of forests and fens (low-lying wetlands) . Dutch land reclamation in the Netherlands in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries provides the most spectacular example of the expansion of farmland: the Dutch reclaimed more than 36,000 acres from 1590 to 1615 alone. 
22. According to paragraph 2, one effect of the desire to increase food production was that 
A. land was cultivated in a different way 
B. more farmers were needed 
C. the rural economy was weakened 
D. forests and wetlands were used for farming 
Much of the potential for European economic develop ment lay in what at first glance would seem to have been only sleepy villages. Such villages, however, generally lay in regions of relatively advanced agricultural production, permitting not only the survival of peasants but also the accumulat ion of an agricultural surplus for investment. They had access to urban merchants, markets, and trade routes. 
23. According to paragraph 3, what was one reason villages had such great economic potential? 
A. Villages were located in regions where agricultural production was relatively advanced. 
B. Villages were relatively small in populati on and size compared with urban areas. 
C. Some village inhabitants made investments in industrial develop ment. 
D. Village inhabitants established markets within their villages. 
Increased agricultural production in turn facilitated rural industry, an intrinsic part of the expansion of industry. Woolens and textile manufacturers, in particular, utilized rural cottage (in-home) production, which took advantage of cheap and plentiful rural labor. In the German states, the ravages of the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648) further moved textile production into the countryside. Members of poor peasant families spun or wove cloth and linens at home for scant remuneration in an attempt to supplement meager family income. 
24. Paragraph 4 supports the idea that increased agricultural production was important for the expansion of industry primarily because it 
A. increased the number of available workers in rural areas 
B. provided new types of raw materials for use by industry 
C. resulted in an improvement in the health of the rural cottage workers used by manufacturers 
D. helped repair some of the ravages of the Thirty Years' War 
More extended trading networks also helped develop Europe's economy in this period. English and Dutch ships carrying rye from the Baltic states reached Spain and Portugal. Population growth generated an expansion of small-scale manufacturing, particularly of handicrafts, textiles, and metal production in England, Flanders, parts of northern Italy, the southwestern German states, and parts of Spain. Only iron smelting and mining required marshaling a significant amount of capital (wealth invested to create more wealth). 
25. Why does the author mention that "English and Dutch ships carrying rye from the Baltic states reached Spain and Portugal "? 
A. To suggest that England and the Netherlands were the two most important trading nations in seventeenth-century Europe 
B. To suggest how extensive trading relations were 
C. To contrast the importance of agricultural products with manufactured products 
D. To argue that shipping introduced a range of new products 
The development of banking and other financial services contributed to the expansion of trade. By the middle of the sixteenth century, financiers and traders commonly accepted bills of exchange in place of gold or silver for other goods. Bills of exchange, which had their origins in medieval Italy, were promissory notes (written promises to pay a specified amount of money by a certain date) that could be sold to third parties. In this way, they provided credit. At midcentury, an Antwerp financier only slightly exaggerated when he claimed, "One can no more trade without bills of exchange than sail without water." Merchants no longer had to carry gold and silver over long, dangerous journeys. An Amsterdam merchant purchasing soap from a merchant in Marseille could go to an exchanger and pay the exchanger the equivalent sum in guilders, the Dutch currency. The exchanger would then send a bill of exchange to a colleague in Marseille, authoriz ing the colleague to pay the Marseille merchant in the merchant's own currency after the actual exchange of goods had taken place. 
26. According to paragrap h 6, merchants were able to avoid the risk of carrying large amounts of gold and silver by 
A. using third parties in Marseille to buy goods for them 
B. doing all their business by using Dutch currency 
C. paying for their purchases through bills of exchange 
D. waiting to pay for goods until the goods had been delivered 
Bills of exchange contributed to the development of banks, as exchangers began to provide loans. Not until the eighteenth century, however, did such banks as the Bank of Amsterdam and the Bank of England begin to provide capital for business investment. Their principal function was to provide funds for the state. 
27. According to paragraph 7, until the eighteenth century, it was the principal function of which of the following to provide funds for the state? 
A. Bills of exchange 
B. Exchangers who took loans 
C. Banks 
D. Business investment
The rapid expansion in international trade also benefitted from an infusion of capital, stemming largely from gold and silver brought by Spanish vessels from the Americas. This capital financed the production of goods, storage, trade, and even credit across Europe and overseas. Moreover, an increased credit supply was generated by investments and loans by bankers and wealthy merchants to states and by joint-stock partnersh ips-an English innovation (the first major company began in 1600). Unlike short-term financial cooperation between investors for a single commercial undertaking, joint-stock companies provided permanent funding of capital by drawing on the investments of merchants and other investors who purchased shares in the company. 
28. According to paragraph 8, each of the following was a source of funds used to finance economic expansion EXCEPT 
A.  groups of investors engaged in short-term financial cooperation 
B.  the state 
C.  wealthy merchants 
D.  joint-stock companies 
The development of banking and other financial services contributed to the expansion of trade. By the middle of the sixteenth century, financiers and traders commonly accepted bills of exchange in place of gold or silver for other goods. Bills of exchange, which had their origins in medieval Italy, were promissor y notes (written promises to pay a specified amount of money by a certain date) that could be sold to third parties. In this way, they provided credit. (A) At mid-century , an Antwerp financier only slightly exaggerated when he claimed, "One can no more trade without bills of exchange than sail without water." (Bl Merchants no longer had to carry gold and silver over long, dangerous journeys. (C) An Amsterdam merchant purchasing soap from a merchant in Marseille could go to an exchanger and pay the exchanger the equivalent sum in guilders, the Dutch currency. (D) The exchanger would then send a bill of exchange to a colleague in Marseille, authorizing the colleague to pay the Marseille merchant in the merchant's own currency after the actual exchange of goods had taken place. 
29. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (B), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
They could also avoid having to identify and assess the value of a wide variety of coins issued in many different places. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C 
D. Choice D 
30. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
In late sixteenth- and early seventeent h-centur y Europe, increased agricultural production and the expansion of trade were important in economic growth . 
Answer Choices 
[A] Bringing more land under cultivation produced enough food to create surpluses for trade and investment as well as for supporting the larger populations that led to the growth of rural industry. 
[B] Most rural villages established an arrangement with a nearby urban center that enabled villagers to take advantage of urban markets to sell any handicrafts they produced. 
[C] Increases in population and the expansion of trade led to increased manufacturing, much of it small-scale in character but some requiring significant capital investment. 
[D] The expansion of trade was facilitated by developments in banking and financial services and benefitted from the huge influx of capital in the form of gold and silver from the Americas. 
[E] Bills of exchange were invented in medieval Italy but became less important as banks began to provide loans for merchants. 
[F] Increased capital was required for the production of goods, for storage, for trade, and for the provision of credit throughout Europe as well as in more distant markets overseas.
LISTENING
This section measures your ability to understand conversa tions and lectures in English.
Listen to each conversation and lecture only one time. After each conversation and lecture, you will answer some questions about it. Answer each question based on what is stated or implied by the speakers. 
You may take notes while you listen and use your notes to help you answer the questions. Your notes will not be scored. 
Answer each question before moving on. Do not return to previous questions. 
It will take about 41 minutes to listen to the conversa tions and lectures and answer the questions about them. 
Directions: Listen to Track 51. 0
Directions: Now answer the questions.
1. What are the speakers mainly discussing? 
A. What the gym pass is used for 
B. How to try out for the swimming team 
C. The popularity of the new exercise classes at the gym 
D. The schedule of exercise classes at the gym 
2. Why does the woman's initial excitement turn to disappointment? 
A.  She is told that all swimming classes are full. 
B.  She learns that she will have to pay extra for classes. 
C.  She finds out that there are no swimmin g classes at her level. 
D.  She thought all sports activities were supervised by coaches. 
3. What does the man imply about people who play sports in the gym? 
A. They do not need an instructor to coach them.
B. They do not usually take swimming classes. 
C. They must pay an extra fee to use the equipment. 
D. They do not need a gym pass. 
4. Why does the woman make an appointment with the swimming instructor? 
A.  To find out when the pool is available 
B.  To apply for a job as assistant swim instructor 
C.  To complain about the gym's policy 
D.  To find out which swimming class she should take 
5. Listen to Track 52. 0 
A.  He wants to change the subject. 
B.  He wants to tell a story. 
C.  He disagrees with the woman. 
D.  He understands the woman's point. 
Directions: Listen to Track 53. 0 
Listening Directions: Now answer the questions. 
6. What is the talk mainly about? 
A. Various predators that threaten young birds 
B. Various patterns of growth in young birds 
C. One way that birds protect their young 
D. One way that birds provide food for their young 
7. According to the lecture, what do birds usually do when putting on a distraction display? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] They imitate another kind of animal. 
[B] They fly in circles around their nest. 
[C] They cover their nest with their wings. 
[D] They pretend they are sick or injured. 
8. According to the lecture, when do birds put on their most conspicuous distraction displays? 
A. Just before they lay their eggs 
B. Immediately after they have laid their eggs 
C. Just before their young become independent 
D. Immediately after their young have left the nest 
9. Listen to Track 54. 0 
A. To introduce an explanation 
B. To express uncertainty 
C. To point out an error
D. To emphasize a point that should be obvious 
10. Listen to Track 55. 0 
A. To explain the behavior of the predator
B. To emphasize that predators have excellent hunting skills 
C. To state the purpose of the birds' behavior 
D. To emphasize the risks involved in a distraction display 
11. Listen to Track 56. 0 
A. To describe the behavior of an injured sandpiper 
B. To give an example of a well-performed broken-wing display 
C. To show why some sandpipers fail to distract predators 
D. To distinguish the sandpiper's display from another kind of display 
Directions: Listen to Track SZ O Architecture Cape Cod house .
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
12. What aspect of architecture in the United States is the lecture mainly about? 
A.  The differences between rural and urban styles of housing 
B.  The reasons for the popularity of a particular type of house 
C.  The various styles of houses that are popular in New England 
D.  The decorative details that are typical of houses built in New England 13. What is mentioned in the lecture as an application of the principle that "form follows function"? 
A.  Smaller houses should have fewer rooms. 
B.  A house's design should reflect the inhabitants' needs. 
C.  The materials for a house should be selected before the house is designed. 
D.  Houses in cold, harsh climates should be built with inexpensive materials. 
14. Why does the woman refer to visiting her grandparents? 
A.  To explain why she is interested in residential architecture 
B.  To explain why she knows a lot about the history of Cape Cod 
C.  To explain why she is familiar with Cape Cod houses 
D.  To explain why she enjoys visiting rural New England 15. According to the lecture, what are two features of Cape Cod houses that were influenced by climate? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] The thickness of the walls 
[B] The slope of the roofs 
[C] The number of windows 
[D] The simplicity of the exterior 
[E] The size of the chimney 
16. According to the professor, what contributed to the attitude of conformity in rural New England communities during the 1600s and 1700s? 
A. People depended on their neighbors for their own survival. 
B. People living in rural areas often had moved there from cities. 
C. People had to live very close to their neighbors. 
D. People had limited access to information from outside their community. 
17. Listen to Track 58. 0 
A. To indicate that the student's answer is wrong 
B. To determine whether the student has prepared for the class 
C. To point out that housing styles across the United States are very similar 
D. To ask about students' preferences in architectural styles Directions: Listen to Track 59. 0 Directions: Now answer the questions. 
18. Why does the professor want to see the student? 
A.  To discuss the student's grade on a paper 
B.  To invite the student to work on a committee 
C.  To inform the student about a change in the class schedule 
D.  To ask the student to become her research assistant 19. Why does the student say he is interested in doing what the professor asks? 
A.  He thinks it may help him improve his research skills. 
B.  He thinks it will enable him to get a better grade in the professor's class. 
C.  He thinks it may help him get into graduate school. 
D.  He thinks it will be good teaching practice for him. 
20. What will the applicants talk about? 
A.  An academic interest they have 
B.  Reasons why they deserve to be hired 
C.  Their educational background 
D.  The classes they hope to teach 21. Why does the professor mention that one of the applicants will give a talk on a topic the student is particularly interested in? 
A.  To see if the student would enjoy joining the applicant's research team 
B.  To suggest that the student may not totally agree with what the applicant has to say 
C.  To persuade the student to come to a talk on Friday 
D.  To warn the student to focus on the applicant's teaching ability 22. Listen to Track 60. 0 ' ;J··: .. :> Listening -!h .::11.. . 
A. He does not know of any job appl icants.
B. He is not interested in learning about the hiring process. 
C. He does not want to be respon sible for any decisions that are made. 
D. He does not understand why the professor has asked him the question. 
Directions: Listen to Track 61. 0
Environmental Science
Direction s: Now answer the questions.
23. What is the lecture mainly about? 
A. The effect of the decrease in temperatures on wetlands 
B. The use of computer models to analyze temperature patterns 
C. The theory that land development affected the climate of south Florida 
D. The importance of the citrus industry to the south Florida economy 
24. Why does the professor mention the building of canals in the wetlands? 
A.  To describe what the wetlands used to look like 
B.  To emphasize that farmers need to transport their crops to other areas 
C.  To explain how the wetlands were transformed into farmland 
D.  To explain why people want to build farms there 25. What does the professor imply about major weather patterns such as El Nino? 
A.  She does not believe they are the main cause of the changes in Florida's climate. 
B.  She is certain that they have caused a worldwide decrease in the number of frosts. 
C.  She believes they contributed to the increase of citrus production in Florida. 
D.  She does not fully understand what causes them. 
26. What point about bodies of water does the professor emphasize to the students? 
A. Bodies of water in Florida are slightly warmer now than they were 100 years ago. 
B. Bodies of water in south Florida are increasing in size. 
C. Bodies of water release heat back into the environment. 
D. Bodies of water are a source of moisture for crops. 
27. What data from 100 years ago and today were entered into the computer model that the professor discusses? 
A. The average temperat ures in south Florida 
B. The market prices of citrus fruit grown in south Florida 
C. The numbers of animal species in south Florida wetlands 
D. The landscape characteristics of south Florida 
28. Listen to Track 62. 0 
A. To remind the professor of her previous point 
B. To check if he understood the professor's point 
C. To express surprise at what the professor said 
D. To answer the professor's question about the farmers
SPEAKING
This section measures your ability to speak in English about a variety of topics.
There are four questions in this section. For each question, you will be given a short time to prepare your response. When the preparation time is up, answer the question as completely as possible in the time indicated for that question. You should record your responses so that you can review them later and compare them with the notes in the Answers section and scoring rubrics. 
1. You will now be asked to give your opinion about a familiar topic. Give yourself 15 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 45 seconds. 
Listen to Track 63. 0 
Some people think that children should be allowed to watch whatever television programs they choose to. Others think that parents should exercise control over the television programs their children watch. Which do you agree with? Explain why. 
Preparation Time: 15 seconds Response Time: 45 seconds 
2. You will now read a short passa ge and listen to a conversation on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 64. 0 
Reading Time: 45 seconds 
Housing Renovations Planned 
Over the last ten years, the number of Central College students living on campus in dormitories has decreased by twenty percent. In an effort to counteract the trend, the college has announced a plan to renovate its on-campus housing. The renovations will take two years, and they will include improvements to the bathrooms, lighting, and heating in the dormitories. "A lot of people are moving off campus because the dorms aren't in great shape," explained the college president. "By renovating the dorms, we can make them more appealing than off-campus housing, and more students will choose to remain on campus." 
Listen to Track 65. 0
The woman expresses her opinion about the college's plan. State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds 
3. You will now read a short passage and listen to a lecture on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 66. 0 Reading Time: 45 seconds 
Outsider Art 
Outsider Art is a term used to describe art that is made by people who choose to live and work outside society. The artists who produce this kind of art-Outs ider Artists-work in isolation from other artists and have little or no formal artistic training. Because they do not learn conventional artistic techniques from teachers or other artists, Outsider Artists must invent their own ways of doing things. As a result of the unconventional methods that Outsider Artists often use, their work can look strange and not at all like traditional art to the observer. "· Listen to Track 67. 0 Explain why Henry Darger is considered an Outsider Artist. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds 
4. You will now listen to part of a lecture. You will then be asked a question about it. After you hear the question, give yourself 20 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 68. 0 
Using the points and examples from the lecture, explain what unity and contrast are, and how they make interior design more effective. 
Preparat ion Time: 20 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds
WRITING
This section measures your ability to write in English to communicate in an academic environment.
There are two writing questions in this section. 
For question 1, you will read a passage and listen to a lecture about the same topic. You may take notes while you read and listen. Then you will write a response to a question based on what you have read and heard. You may look back at the passage when answering the question. You may use your notes to help you answer the question. You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. 
For question 2, you will write an essay based on your own knowledge and experience. You have 30 minutes to plan and complete your essay. '..r" � > "( Directions: Give yourself 3 minutes to read the passage. 
Reading Time: 3 minutes 
A recent study reveals that people, especially young people, are reading far less literature-novels, plays, and poems-than they used to. This is troubling because the trend has unfortunate effects for the reading public, for culture in general, and for the future of literature itself. 
While there has been a decline in book reading generally, the decline has been especially sharp for literature. This is unfortunate because nothing else provides the intellectual stimulation that literature does. Literature encourages us to exercise our imaginations, empathize with others, and expand our understanding of language. So by reading less literature, the reading public is missing out on important benefits. 
Unfortunately, missing out on the benefits of literature is not the only problem. What are people reading instead? Consider the prevalence of self-help books on lists of best sellers. These are usually superficial, poorly written, and intellectual ly undemanding. Additionally, instead of sitting down with a challenging novel, many persons are now more likely to turn on the television, watch a music video, or read a Web page. Clearly, diverting time previously spent in reading literature to trivial forms of entertainment has lowered the level of culture in general. 
The trend of reading less literature is all the more regrettable because it is taking place during a period when good literature is being written. There are many talented writers today, but they lack an audience. This fact is bound to lead publishers to invest less in literature and so support fewer serious writers. Thus, the writing as well as the reading of literature is likely to decline because of the poor standards of today's readers. 
Listen to Track 69. 0 
Directions: You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. Your response will be judged on the basis of the quality of your writing and on how well your response presents the points in the lecture and their relationship to the reading passage. Typically, an effective response will be 150 to 225 words. 
Listen to Track 70. 0 
Response Time: 20 minutes 
1. Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they cast doubt on specific points made in the reading passage. 
Directions: Read the question below. You have 30 minutes to plan, write, and revise your essay. 
Typically, an effective response will contain a minimum of 300 words. 
Response Time: 30 minutes 
2. Some people say that the Internet provides people with a lot of valuable information. 
Others think access to so much information creates problems. 
Which view do you agree with? 
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. Be sure to use your own words. 
Do not use memorized examples.
ANSWERS
Reading Section 
1. D 17. C
2. C 18. B 
3. B 19. A 
4. B 20. A,C, F 
5. A 21. B 
6. D 22. D 
7. D 23. A 
8. B 24. A 
9. D 25. B 
10. B, C, E 26. C 
11. D 27. C 
12. B 28. B 
13. C 29. C 
14. B 30. A,C, D 
15. A 
16. A 
Listen ing Section 
1. A 
2. B 
3. A 
4. D 
5. C
6. C 
7. A,D 
8. C 
9. A 
10. C
11. D 
12. B 
13. B 
14. C
15. B, D 
16. A 
17. A 
18. B 
19. c 20. A 
21. D 
22. D 
23. c 24. c 25. A 
26. c 27. D 
28. A 
Speaking Section
Prompts, Important Points, and Sample Responses with Rater Comments 
Use the sample Independent and Integrated Speaking Rubrics in Appendix A to see how responses are scored. The raters who listen to your responses will analyze them in three general categories. These categories are Delivery, Language Use, and Topic Development. All three categories have equal importance. 
This section includes important points that should be covered when answering each question. All of these points must be present in a response in order for it to receive the highest score in the Topic Development category. These important points are guides to the kind of information raters expect to hear in a high-level response. 
This section also refers to sample responses, which can be found on the audio tracks. Some responses were scored at the highest level, which others were not. The responses are followed by comments from certified ETS raters. 
1: Paired Choice 
Prompt 
Some people think that children should be allowed to watch whatever television programs they choose to. Others think that parents should exercise control over the television programs their children watch. Which do you agree with? Explain why. 
Important Points 
In this question you need to choose the statement that you agree with and explain why you agree with it. In order to give an effective response, you should provide clear, specific reasons that support your opinion. You will not be scored on which statement you agree with, but rather on how effectively you are able to present and support your opinion. 
A reason to support the first statement could be that learning to make good decisions is an important part of growing up and rather than restricting a child's viewing, a parent should focus on teaching the child to make good decisions. A reason to support the second statement might include an example of an inappropriate program that parents should not let their children watch and explain why watching that program might have a negative effect on a child. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 71. O 
Rater Comments 
This speaker demonstrates good control in language use and accurately uses a variety of grammatical structures and effective vocabulary . 
Her pronunciation is clear throughout and her use of intonation is appropriate. She chooses to develop the idea of parental responsibility towards children and explains why she thinks this is important. The response would have been even fuller if she had given an example of a program that is not suitable for young children and why. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 72. O 
Rater Comments 
This speaker states his opinion clearly but does not develop his ideas fully with clear support. He does provide a reason for his opinion that children should be able to watch whatever they want: that they can tell real things apart from "not real things." He then repeats the same basic idea in other words with imprecise language: "I sure that a child view television with an enjoy and not with a real situation." The speaker does not demonstrate that he can use a variety of grammatical structures or that he has a wide range of vocabulary. Though an accent is evident, pronunciation is generally clear overall. 
2: Fit and Explain 
Prompt 
The woman expresses her opinion about the college's plan. State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion. 
Important Points 
To respond to this item, you should explain that the woman does not believe that the university's plan to renovate the dormitories in .rorder to get more students to live on campus will work. To explain the points she makes, you could say that she argues that the renovations will create noise or disturbances, and that people will actually move off campus because of that in the short term. 
You should also point out her argument that in the long term students will likely remain in off-campus housing after the construction ends, since the university will have to raise the cost of housing to pay for the renovations. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 73. O 
Rater Comments 
This speaker demonstrates a clear understanding of the information from both the reading and the conversation. He doesn't say until the end of his response that the woman disagrees with the plan, and that she doesn't think it will work. However , this doesn't prevent the listener from following the logic of the response. Consider this sentence from his response: "She saying the price of the dorm fee will be raised ... and it will go back to the student, and therefore student will look for the off campus apartment , which seems cheaper." We see some minor grammatical errors here, and the speaker mispronounces a few select words (price, cheaper), but he uses intonation well and is able to communicate the point effectively. Overall, this is a well-developed and easy to understand response. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 74. O 
Rater Comments 
In this response, the speaker touches on most of the important points; however, she does not do so with the fluidity and clarity characteristic of a high-level response. Her vocabulary is limited, and she hesitates and repeats words and phrases frequently, which requires listener effort. For example, it is hard to follow when she says, "and and after the construction, the man was saying that maybe it's good after the construction." She also does not explicitly explain that the noise from the renovations will cause students to move off campus, and that later on, they will not move back \ ,c1because the renovations will be paid for by raising the price of housing. 
3: General/Specific 
Prompt 
Explain why Henry Darger is considered an Outsider Artist. 
Important Points 
In this item, you need to explain how Henry Darger fits the description of an Outsider Artist as described in the reading passage. Since Outsider Artists live and work outside of society, they produce art that is unusual and is made in ways that are different from other artists. Henry Darger fits this description because he lived and worked alone and taught himself to paint. Therefore his art looked different from other artists' work; for example, in one painting he cut out pictures of children from magazines and put them in his painting (and they also had more detail and were longer than paintings by most other artists). 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 75. 0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker does a very good job of choosing details from the lecture that illustrate why Henry Darger is considered an Outsider Artist. He first describes characteristics of Outsider Artists, then describes how Darger matches these characteristic s: "He lived alone; he had no friends ... he never showed those paintings to anybody; he never studied art. And his work is a unique work, and he has his own style." Occasionally he uses the wrong vocabulary word, such as using "conversation" instead of "lecture," but these errors do not ever make his ideas hard to follow. His response is also fluent, and his pronunciation is almost always easy to understand. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 76. 0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker organizes her response well, giving two main reasons that Darger was considered an Outsider Artist. However, she does not quite show how living and working alone or lacking a formal art education made him an Outsider Artist-she just seems to be explaining why he is a modern artist. 
Most of her pronunciation is clear, but sometimes it is difficult to understand certain phrases. She also makes a number of grammar mistakes "that's why he has make a big difference," "his production was totally innovate," "he was a man who were different." Because of how often she makes these mistakes, the listener sometimes has to work harder to follow her ideas. 
4:Summary 
Prompt 
Using the points and examples from the lecture, explain what unity and contrast are, and how they make interior design more effective. 
Important Points 
In this item, your summary of the key ideas from the lecture should include the definitions of unity and contrast described by the professor. You should also describe how interior designers use unity and contrast, connecting the concepts to the specific examples mentioned. Unity is the repetition of similar elements, which creates a sense of order and comfort. For example, a designer might use similar colors throughout a room. Contrast is an occasional break in unity, which makes the design more interesting. For example, a designer might introduce a strikingly different color in one or two places. Contrast makes the design more interesting; however, too much contrast will make the room feel busy. Effective design creates a balance between unity and contrast. The order in which you present these ideas does not matter, as long as the response is logical and coherent. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 77. 0 
Rater Comments 
This is a complete and coherent response that presents the principles of unity and contrast, connects them clearly to the examples given, and explains why both are necessary for effective interior design. The speaker's logical organization of information and effective use of transitions make the response easy to follow (for example "however, too much of unity is also boring ... and therefore, comes into picture the second important aspect, which is contrast"). Note that although the speaker makes ii.X,{: Answers ··., ' occasional minor errors in grammar and usage, the meaning remains clear. The influence of the speaker's native language may be heard in the pronunciation and intonation, but he is still easy to understand. 
The speaker generally uses pauses and stress to communicate emphasis appropriately and make the response easier to follow, for example "what it will bring is [pause] disruption." 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 78. O 
Rater Comments 
This response describes unity and contrast and provides examples, but the explanation is not as full and clear as it could be. For example, the speaker describes unity as just using the same colors in a design, rather than similar elements in general, and does not mention the purpose of unity (order and comfort). At times, inaccurate words or phrases make it difficult to guess what the speaker means ("You need contrasting thing to blend [plant?] the application"). The speaker would also benefit from more careful pronunciation in general as some sections are very difficult to understand, thus obscuring her ideas. Overall, the speaker does not communicate her ideas as clearly as the high-level speaker does. 
Writing Section 
Prompts, Topic Notes, and Sample Responses with Rater Comments 
Use the sample Integrated and Independent Writing Rubrics in Appendix A to see how responses are scored. 
This section includes topic notes that are guides to the kind of information raters expect to read in a high-level response. 
This section also refers to sample responses, which can be found on the audio tracks. These responses were scored at the highest level. The responses are followed by comments from certified ETS raters. 
Question 1 
Prompt
Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they cast doubt on the specific points made in the reading passage. 
Topic Notes 
The reading discusses three bad effects of people reading less literature than they used to. The lecture shows why these effects are not so bad or are caused by something other than people choosing not to read so much literature. 
Responses with scores of 4 and 5 typically discuss all three points in the table with good accuracy. There can be some blending of the ideas in the first two points. 
Sample Response
The lecturer discusses the points made in the text but reaches a different conclusion in each case. 
For one thing, she states that yes, people are reading less literature then they were in earlier times but this does not equal an imediate decline of culture. On the contrary, in her opinion our culture is simply evolving and changing. Although literature is one of the most obvious elements of culture, there are also lots of other forms of artistic expression in our everchanging culture, e.g. music. And those elements are not less valuable and less creative then literature and they appeal to more modern concerns than literature. 
Also the lecturer disputes the text that says we are going to lose interesting writers of literature. She says that today literature is not interesting enough for the reader! In the lecturers opinion this is mainly due to the fact that modern literature is often written with the intention of beeing difficult to understand, which does not make it very attractive for the modern reader. 
Point made in the reading 
The passage argues that reading less literature means that readers are missing out on ways to stimulate their imagination and help with their mental development. 
The passage argues that many of the kinds of reading that people currently spend time on instead of literature are just trivial entertainment and lead to lower cultural standards. 
The passage says that another bad effect of the decline in reading literature is that talented writers of literature are not being supported. 
Corres ponding point from the lecture The lecturer points out that there are other forms of writing that are of high quality and just as intellectually stimulating as literature. 
The lecturer argues that people spend time on culturally valuable activities such as listening to good music or watching good movies. The definition of culture is changing. 
The lecturer argues that maybe there is less readershi p of literature because the writers of literature nowadays are making their books/works too hard to understand. 
And finally just because people are not reading literature anymore this does not mean they are not reading at all and losing their imagination and empathy; instead there are many other valuable types of books which people are reading, e.g. science textbooks and political analyzis. These books can stimulate readers and provide satisfaction and learning. 
Rater Comments 
This response earns a score of 5. The response clearly conveys the key ideas contained in the three points from the lecture. Notice that the points are not presented in the order they are discussed in the reading and lecture, but the way that this writer has presented them is coherent and accurate. Grammatical errors such as "then" instead of "than" in the first paragraph and a missing possessive apostrophe with "lecturers" in the second paragraph are few and minor. Grammatical variety and complexity are clearly present. 
Question 2 
Prompt 
Some people say that the Internet provides people with a lot of valuable information. Others think access to so much information creates problems. Which view do you agree with? 
Topic Notes
This topic asks you to assess the value of the access to a large quantity of information that the Internet provides us with these days. Successful responses can agree with the statement, disagree with the statement, or show the merits of both positions. No matter which position you take, it is important to support your opinion with details and examples. 
If you agree with the statement, you should present and develop reasons that the quantity of information available is a good thing and has value. A reason may include the idea that the Internet has allowed people to learn about topics that they would not have had exposure to before the Internet became widely available. As part of supporting that approach, you could explain that some topic you have researched on the Internet would have either been impossible or have taken a very long time to get information about if you were limited to looking up the topic in books at your local library. 
If you disagree with the statement, you should present and develop reasons that the quantity of information now available can be overwhelming and detrimental to learners, consumers, or some other audience. A reason may include the idea that many people can't distinguish between good . and poor quality inform ation on the Internet, for example, when choosing a particular product to buy, and so they are no bette r off in terms of gett ing valuable information about the product than if they had just gone to a shop to ask the salesperson about it. 
If you believe that both of these positions have merit, you can present a balanced argument that presents both sides of the issues. 
Sample Response 
It is a fact that in the past few years, the Internet has exploded in terms of size, amount of information and accessibility. 
The usage of the Internet encompasses every aspect of day-to-day life with a few examp les being Shoppin g, News, Weather, Live Webcasts and much more. People who used to rely on traditional sources of information like the radio, TV, Newsp apers are now increasingly flockin g to t he Internet or the "Web" as it's popula rly called. 
As more and more people get on the Web, it becomes increasingly effective for c ompanies to use the web to reach out for the consum ers. This also applies for Advertisers, Marketers, Content Providers, Newsm akers etc to adopt the same strateg ies. All the inform ation is now available online and when it all adds up, there is a wealth of information that is now available to whoever seeks to find them. So, I strongly agree with view that the Internet provid es people with a lot of valuable information, much more than what is actually necessary. 
Now, providin g too much information can also prove to be counter-produc tive. How d oes a consum er pick the right information, when there is so much available online? How does he filter to get the data that he needs? Is there a chance that the data he needs is buried so mewhere in the middle? It is highly probable, or let me say, this was the case a few years back. So, technically, people were correct whe n they said too much information also create d problems. 
Fortunately, Technology finds ways to make it easier to use an innovation over a period of time. In the last few years, Internet search engines have been gett ing smarter everyday. They enable a user to enter a search string and then it searches the Internet for the most relevant and appropriate data and pr esents them to the user, with the results listed in the order of importance. They also offer the user several options to further filter the provid ed results, making it easier to zone on the correct data. 
In summary, whil e it is true that there is a lot of not very valuable information on the web, which may be counter-productive for users, there are also means to effectively seek and find the appr opriate information, thus provid ing a g reat deal of value to people who are looking to learn about a subject, buy the best produc t for their needs, or any one of m any other activities that people need to do nowadays. 
Rater Comments 
This 5-level response acknowledges the merits of both positions, whil e ultimately coming out in favor of the idea that the Internet provid es a lot of valuable information. The writer describ es some reasons why p eople use the Internet, explains how helpful it can be for both individu als and companies, and concedes in the fourth paragraph that access to too much information on line can be a bad thing. In the fifth paragraph, the writer explains how techn ology is advancin g so that the negat ive aspects mentioned in the preceding paragraph are becoming less and less problematic. Th e writer goes on to conclud e that in spite of some drawbacks, overall the Internet is quite valuable in what it provid es to us. This is a goo d progression of ideas, and the writer has expressed those ideas by usin g, mostly accur ately, a good r ange of vocabulary and sentence structure. Errors such as "reach out for the consum ers" instead of "reach out to consum ers" are minor and do not interfere with meaning.