READING
This section measures your ability to understand academic passages in English.
There are three passages in the section. Give yourself 18 minutes to read each passage and answer the questions about it. The entire section will take 54 minutes to complete. 
You may look back at a passage when answering the questions. You can skip questions and go back to them later as long as there is time remaining. 
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
TYPES OF SOCIAL GROUPS 
Life places us in a complex web of relationships with other people. Our humanness arises out of these relationships in the course of social interaction. Moreover, our humanness must be sustained through social interaction-and fairly constant ly so. When an association continues long enough for two people to become linked together by a relatively stable set of expectations, it is called a relationship. 
People are bound within relationships by two types of bonds: expressive ties and instrumental ties. Expressive ties are social links formed when we emotionally invest ourselves in and commit ourselves to other people. Through association with people who are meaningful to us, we achieve a sense of security, love, acceptance, companionship, and personal worth. Instrumental ties are social links formed when we cooperate with other people to achieve some goal. Occasiona lly, this may mean working with instead of against competitors. More often, we simply cooperate with others to reach some end without endowing the relationship with any larger significance. 
Sociologists have built on the distinction between expressive and instrumental ties to distinguish between two types of groups: primary and secondary. A primary group involves two or more people who enjoy a direct, intimate, cohesive relationship with one another. Expressive ties predominate in primary groups; we view the people as ends in themselves and valuable in their own right. A secondary group entails two or more people who are involved in an impersona l relationship and have come together for a specific, practical purpose. Instrumental ties predominate in secondary groups; we perceive people as means to ends rather than as ends in their own right. Sometimes primary group relationships evolve out of secondary group relationships . This happens in many work settings. People on the job often develop close relationships with coworkers as they come to share gripes, jokes, gossip, and satisfactions. 
A number of conditions enhance the likelihood that primary groups will arise. First, group size is important. We find it difficult to get to know people personally when they are milling about and dispersed in large groups. In small groups we have a better chance to initiate contact and establish rapport with them. Second, face-to-face contact allows us to size up others. Seeing and talking with one another in close physical proximity makes possible a subtle exchange of ideas and feelings. And third, the probability that we will develop primary group bonds increases as we have frequent and continuous contact. Our ties with people often deepen as we interact with them across time and gradually evolve interlocking habits and interests. 
Primary groups are fundamental to us and to society. First, primary groups are critical to the socialization process. Within them, infants and children are introduced to the ways of their society. Such groups are the breeding grounds in which we acquire the norms and values that equip us for social life. Sociolog ists view primary groups as bridges between individuals and the larger society because they transmit, mediate, and interpret a society's cultural patterns and provide the sense of oneness so critical for social solidarity. 
Second, primary groups are fundamenta l because they provide the settings in which we meet most of our personal needs. Within them, we experience companionship, love, security, and an overall sense of well-being. Not surprisin gly, sociologists find that the strength of a group's prima ry ties has implications for the group's functioning. For example, the stronger the primary group ties of a sports team playing together, the better their record is. 
Third, primary groups are fundamental because they serve as powerful instruments for social control. Their members command and dispense many of the rewards that are so vital to us and that make our lives seem worthwhi le. Should the use of rewards fail, members can frequent ly win by rejecting or threatening to ostracize those who deviate from the primary group's norms. For instance, some social groups employ shunning (a person can remain in the community, but others are forbidden to interact with the person) as a device to bring into line individua ls whose behavior goes beyond that allowed by the particular group. Even more important, primary groups define social reality for us by structuring our experiences. By providing us with definitions of situations, they elicit from us behavior that conforms to group-devised meanings. Primary groups, then, serve both as carriers of social norms and as enforcers of them. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
People are bound within relationships by two types of bonds: expressive ties and instrumental ties. Expressive ties are social links formed when we emotionally invest ourselves in and commit ourselves to other people. Through association with people who are meaningful to us, we achieve a sense of security, love, acceptance, companionship, and personal worth. 
Instrumen tal ties are social links formed when we cooperate with other people to achieve some goal. Occasionally, this may mean working with instead of against competitors. More often, we simply cooperate with others to reach some end without endowing the relationship with any larger significance. 
1. The word "endowing" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. leaving 
B. exposing 
C. providing 
D. understanding 
2. Which of the following can be inferred about instrumental ties from the author's mention of working with competitors in paragraph 2? 
A. Instrument al ties can develop even in situations in which people would normally not cooperate. 
B. Instrume ntal ties require as much emotional investment as expressive ties. 
C. Instrume ntal ties involve security, love, and acceptance. 
D. Instrument al ties should be expected to be significant. 
Sociolog ists have built on the distinction between expressive and instrumental ties to distinguish between two types of groups: primary and secondary. A primary group involves two or more people who enjoy a direct, intimate, cohesive relationship with one another. Expressive ties predomi nate in primary groups; we view the people as ends in themselves and valuable in their own right. A secondary group entails two or more people who are involved in an impersonal relationship and have come together for a specific, practical purpose. Instrumental ties predominate in secondary groups; we perceive people as means to ends rather than as ends in their own right. Sometimes primary group relationships evolve out of secondary group relationships. This happens in many work settings. People on the job often develop close relationships with coworkers as they come to share gripes, jokes, gossip, and satisfactions. 
3. According to paragraph 3, what do sociologists see as the main difference between primary and secondary groups? 
A. Primary groups consist of people working together, while secondary groups exist outside of work settings. 
B. In primary groups people are seen as means, while in secondary groups people are seen as ends. 
C. Primary groups involve personal relationships, while secondary groups are mainly practical in purpose. 
D. Primary groups are generally small, while secondary groups often contain more than two people. 
4. Which of the following can be inferred from the author's claim in paragraph 3 that primary group relationships sometimes evolve out of secondary group relationships? 
A. Secondary group relationships begin by being primary group relationships. 
B. A secondary group relationship that is highly visible quickly becomes a primary group relationship. 
C. Sociologists believe that only primary group relationships are important to society. 
D. Even in secondary groups, frequent commun ication serves to bring people into close relationships. 
A number of conditions enhance the likelihood that primary groups will arise. First, group size is important. We find it difficult to get to know people personally when they are milling about and dispersed in large groups. In small groups we have a better chance to initiate contact and establish rapport with them. Second, face-to-face contact allows us to size up others. Seeing and talking with one another in close physical proximity makes possible a subtle exchange of ideas and feelings. And third, the probability that we will develop primary group bonds increases as we have frequent and continuous contact. Our ties with people often deepen as we interact with them across time and gradually evolve interlocking habits and interests. 
5. The phrase "size up" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. enlarge 
B. evaluate 
C. impress 
D. accept
Primary groups are fundamental to us and to society. First, primary groups are critical to the socialization process. Within them, infants and children are introduced to the ways of their society. 
Such groups are the breeding grounds in which we acquire the norms and values that equip us for social life. Sociolog ists view primary groups as bridges between individuals and the larger society because they transmit, mediate, and interpret a society's cultural patterns and provide the sense of oneness so critical for social solidarity. 
6. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A. Sociologists think that cultural patterns establish connections between the individual and the larger society. 
B. Sociologists believe that individuals with a sense of oneness bridge the gap between society and primary groups. 
C. Sociologists think primary groups contribute to social solidarity because they help maintain a society's cultural patterns. 
D. Sociologists believe that the cultural patterns that provide social solidarity arise as bridges from primary groups. 
Third, primary groups are fundamental because they serve as powerful instruments for social control. Their members command and dispense many of the rewards that are so vital to us and that make our lives seem worthwhile. Should the use of rewards fail, members can frequently win by rejecting or threatening to ostracize those who deviate from the primary group's norms. For instance, some social groups employ shunning (a person can remain in the community, but others are forbidden to interact with the person) as a device to bring into line individuals whose behavior goes beyond that allowed by the particular group. Even more important, primary groups define social reality for us by structuring our experiences. By providing us with definitions of situations, they elicit from us behavior that conforms to group-devised meanings. Primary groups, then, serve both as carriers of social norms and as enforcers of them. 
7. The word "deviate" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. detract 
B. advance 
C. select 
D. depart 
8. According to paragraph 7, why would a social group use shunning? 
A. To enforce practice of the kinds of behavior acceptable to the group 
B. To discourage offending individuals from remaining in the group 
C. To commend and reward the behavior of the other members of the group 
D. To decide which behavioral norms should be passed on to the next generation.
Second, primary groups are fundamental becau se they provide the settings in which we meet most of our pers onal needs. (A) Within them, we experience compa nionship , love, securi ty, and an overa ll sense of well-bei ng. (B) Not surprisingly, sociologists find that the strength of a group's primar y ties has impl ications for the group's functioning. (C) For example, the stronger the primary grou p ties of a sports team playing together , the better their record is. (D) 
9. Directions: Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (B), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
People who do not live alone, for example, tend to make healthier life choices and develop fewer pathologies than people who live by themselves. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C
D. Choice D 
10. Directions: Comple te the table below by selecting THREE answer choic es that are char acteristics of primary groups and ONE answer choice that is char acteristic of secondary groups. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
Primary groups Secondary groups 
Answer Choices
[A] Developing socially acceptable behavior 
[B] Experiencing pressure from outside forces 
[C] Viewing people as a means to an end 
[D] Prov iding mea ning for life situations 
[E] Involving close relationships.
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS 
Survival and successful reproduction usually require the activities of animals to be coordinated with predictable events around them. Conseque ntly, the timing and rhythms of biological functions must closely match periodic events like the solar day, the tides, the lunar cycle, and the seasons. The relations between animal activity and these periods, particularly for the daily rhythms, have been of such interest and importance that a huge amount of work has been done on them and the special research field of chronobiology has emerged. Normally, the constantly changing levels of an animal's activity-sleeping, feeding, moving, reproducin g, metabolizing, and producing enzymes and hormones, for example-are well coordinated with environmental rhythms, but the key question is whether the animal's schedule is driven by external cues, such as sunrise or sunset, or is instead dependent somehow on internal timers that themselve s generate the observed biological rhythms. Almost universally, biologists accept the idea that all eukaryotes (a category that includes most organisms except bacteria and certain algae) have internal clocks. By isolating organisms completely from external periodic cues, biologists learned that organisms have internal clocks. For instance, apparently normal daily periods of biological activity were maintained for about a week by the fungus Neurospora when it was intentionally isolated from all geophysical timing cues while orbiting in a space shuttle. The continuation of biological rhythms in an organism without external cues attests to its having an internal clock. 
When crayfish are kept continuously in the dark, even for four to five months, their compound eyes continue to adjust on a daily schedule for daytime and nighttime vision. Horseshoe crabs kept in the dark continuously for a year were found to maintain a persistent rhythm of brain activity that similarly adapts their eyes on a daily schedule for bright or for weak light. Like almost all daily cycles of animals deprived of environme ntal cues, those measured for the horseshoe crabs in these conditions were not exactly 24 hours. Such a rhythm whose period is approximately-but not exactly-a day is called circadian. For different individual horseshoe crabs, the circadian period ranged from 22.2 to 25.5 hours. A particular animal typically maintains its own characteristic cycle duration with great precision for many days. Indeed, stability of the biological clock's period is one of its major features, even when the organism's environment is subjected to considerable changes in factors, such as temperature, that would be expected to affect biological activity strongly. Further evidence for persistent internal rhythms appears when the usual external cycles are shifted-either experimentally or by rapid east-west travel over great distances. Typically, the animal's daily internally generated cycle of activity continue s without change. As a result, its activities are shifted relative to the external cycle of the new environment . The disorienting effects of this mismatch between external time cues and internal schedules may persist, like our jet lag, for several days or weeks until certain cues such as the daylight/darkness cycle reset the organism's clock to synchronize with the daily rhythm of the new environment. 
Animals need natural periodic signals like sunrise to maintain a cycle whose period is precisely 24 hours. Such an external cue not only coordinates an animal's daily rhythms with particular features of the local solar day but also-because it normally does so day after day-seems to keep the internal clock's period close to that of Earth's rotation. Yet despite this synchronization of the period of the internal cycle, the animal's timer itself continues to have its own genetically built-in period close to, but different from, 24 hours. Without the external cue, the difference accumulates and so the internally regulated activities of the biological day drift continuously, like the tides, in relation to the solar day. This drift has been studied extensive ly in many animals and in biological activities ranging from the hatching of fruit fly eggs to wheel running by squirrels. Light has a predominating influence in setting the clock. Even a fifteen-minute burst of light in otherwise sustained darkness can reset an animal's circadian rhythm. Normally, internal rhythms are kept in step by regular environmental cycles. For instance, if a homing pigeon is to navigate with its Sun compass, its clock must be properly set by cues provided by the daylight/darkness cycle. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
Survival and successful reproduction usually require the activities of animals to be coordinated with predictable events around them. Consequently, the timing and rhythms of biological functions must closely match periodic events like the solar day, the tides, the lunar cycle, and the seasons. The relations between animal activity and these periods, particularly for the daily rhythms, have been of such interest and importance that a huge amount of work has been done on them and the special research field of chronobiology has emerged. Normally, the constantly changing levels of an animal's activity-sleeping, feeding, moving, reproducing, metabolizing, and producing enzymes and hormones, for example-are well coordinated with environmental rhythms, but the key question is whether the animal's schedule is driven by external cues, such as sunrise or sunset, or is instead dependent someho w on internal timers that themselves generate the observed biological rhythms. Almost universa lly, biologists accept the idea that all eukaryotes (a category that includes most organisms except bacteria and certain algae) have internal clocks. By isolating organisms completely from external periodic cues, biologists learned that organisms have internal clocks. For instance, apparently normal daily periods of biological activity were maintained for about a week by the fungus Neurospora when it was intentionally isolated from all geophysical timing cues while orbiting in a space shuttle. The continuation of biological rhythms in an organism without external cues attests to its having an internal clock. 
11. The word "Consequently" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. Therefore 
B. Additiona lly 
C. Nevertheless 
D. Moreover 
12. In paragraph 1, the experiment on the fungus Neurospora is mentioned to illustrate 
A. the existence of weekly periods of activity as well as daily ones 
B. the finding of evidence that organisms have internal clocks 
C. the effect of space on the internal clocks of organisms 
D. the isolation of one part of an organism 's cycle for study
13. According to paragraph 1, all the following are generally assumed to be true EXCEPT: 
A. It is important for animals' daily activities to be coordinat ed with recurring events in their environment. 
B. Eukaryotes have internal clocks. 
C. The relationship between biological function and environmental cycles is a topic of intense research. 
D. Animals' daily rhythms are more dependent on external cues than on internal clocks. 
When crayfish are kept continuou sly in the dark, even for four to five months, their compound eyes continue to adjust on a daily schedule for daytime and nighttime vision. Horseshoe crabs kept in the dark continuou sly for a year were found to maintain a persistent rhythm of brain activity that similarly adapts their eyes on a daily schedule for bright or for weak light. Like.almost all daily cycles of animals deprived of environmental cues, those measured for the horseshoe crabs in these conditions were not exactly 24 hours. Such a rhythm whose period is approximat ely-but not exactly-a day is called circadia n. For different individual horseshoe crabs, the circadian period ranged from 22.2 to 25.5 hours. A particular animal typically maintain s its own characteristic cycle duration with great precision for many days. Indeed, stability of the biological clock's period is one of its major features, even when the organism's environment is subjected to considerable changes in factors, such as temperature, that would be expected to affect biological activity strongly. Further evidence for persistent internal rhythms appears when the usual external cycles are shifted-either experimentally or by rapid east-west travel over great distances. Typically, the animal's daily internally generated cycle of activity continues without change. As a result, its activities are shifted relative to the external cycle of the new environment. The disorienting effects of this mismatch between external time cues and internal schedules may persist, like our jet lag, for several days or weeks until certain cues such as the daylight/dar kness cycle reset the organism's clock to synchroniz e with the daily rhythm of the new environment. 
14. The word "duration " in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. length 
B. feature 
C. process 
D. repetition 
15. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlight ed sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A. Stability, a feature of the biological clock's period, depends on changeable factors such as temperature. 
B. A major feature of the biological clock is that its period does not change despite significant changes in the environment. 
C. A factor such as temperature is an important feature in the establishment of the biological clock's period. 
D. Biological activity is not strongly affected by changes in temperature.
16. According to paragrap h 2, what will an animal experience when its internal rhythms no longer correspond with the daily cycle of the environment? 
A. Disorientation B. Change in period of the internal rhythms C. Complete reversal of day and night activities D. Increased sensitivity to environment al factors 
17. In paragraph 2, the author provides evidence for the role of biological clocks by 
A. listing the daily activities of an animal's cycle: sleeping, feeding, moving, reproducin g, metabolizing, and producing enzymes and hormones 
B. describing the process of establishing the period of a biological clock 
C. presenting cases in which an animal's daily schedule remained stable despite lack of environmen tal cues 
D. contrasting animals whose daily schedules fluctuate with those of animals whose schedules are constant 
Animals need natural periodic signals like sunrise to maintain a cycle whose period is precisely 24 hours. Such an external cue not only coordinates an animal's daily rhythms with particular features of the local solar day but also-because it normally does so day after day­seems to keep the internal clock's period close to that of Earth's rotation. Yet despite this synchronization of the period of the internal cycle, the animal's timer itself continues to have its own genetically built-in period close to, but different from, 24 hours. Without the external cue, the difference accumulates and so the internally regulated activities of the biological day drift continuously, like the tides, in relation to the solar day, This drift has been studied extensively in many animals and in biological activities ranging from the hatching of fruit fly eggs to wheel running by squirrels. Light has a predominating influence in setting the clock. Even a fifteenminute burst of light in otherwise sustained darkness can reset an animal's circadian rhythm. 
Normally, internal rhythms are kept in step by regular environmental cycles. For instance, if a homing pigeon is to navigate with its Sun compass, its clock must be properly set by cues provided by the daylight/darkness cycle. 
18. The word "sustained" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. intense 
B. uninterrupted 
C. natural 
D. periodic 
Animals need natural periodic signals like sunrise to maintain a cycle whose period is precisely 24 hours. (A) Such an external cue not only coordinates an animal's daily rhythms with particular features of the local solar day but also-because it normally does so day after day seems to keep the internal clock's period close to that of Earth's rotation. (B) Yet despite this synchron ization of the period of the internal cycle, the animal's timer itself continues to have its own genetica lly built-in period close to, but different from, 24 hours. (C) Without the external cue, the difference accumulates and so the internally regulated activities of the biological day drift continuously , like the tides, in relation to the solar day. (D) This drift has been studied extensively in many animals and in biological activities ranging from the hatching of fruit fly eggs to wheel running by squirrels. Light has a predominating influence in setting the clock. 
Even a fifteen-minute burst of light in otherwise sustained darkness can reset an animal's circadian rhythm. Normally, internal rhythms are kept in step by regular environmental cycles. 
For instance, if a homing pigeon is to navigate with its Sun compass, its clock must be properly set by cues provided by the daylight/darkness cycle. 
19. Directions: Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (B), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
Because the internal signals that regulate waking and going to sleep tend to align themsel ves with these external cues, the external clock appears to dominate the internal clock. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C
D. Choice D 
20. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
The activity of animals is usually coordina ted with periodically recurring events in the environment . 
Answer Choices
[A] Most animals survive and reproduce successfully without coordinating their activities to external environmental rhythms. 
[B] Animals have internal clocks that influence their activities even when environmental cues are absent. 
[C] The circadian period of an animal's internal clock may vary slightly for different individuals but is generally quite stable for any one individual. 
[D] Animals are less affected by large differences between their internal rhythms and the local solar day than are humans. 
[E] Environmental cues such as a change in temperature are enough to reset an animal's clock. 
[F] Because an animal's internal clock does not operate on a 24-hour cycle, environmental stimuli are needed to keep the biological day aligned with the solar day. Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. 
Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
METHODS OF STUDYING INFANT PERCEPTION 
In the study of perceptual abilities of infants, a number of techniques are used to determine infants' responses to various stimuli. Because they cannot verbalize or fill out questionnaires, indirect techniques of naturalistic observation are used as the primary means of determining what infants can see, hear, feel, and so forth. Each of these methods compares an infant's state prior to the introduction of a stimulus with its state during or immediately following the stimulus. The difference between the two measures provides the researcher with an indication of the level and duration of the response to the stimulus. For example, if a uniformly moving pattern of some sort is passed across the visual field of a neonate (newborn) , repetitive following movements of the eye occur. The occurrence of these eye movements provides evidence that the moving pattern is perceived at some level by the newborn. Similarly, changes in the infant's general level of motor activity-turning the head, blinking the eyes, crying, and so forth-have been used by researchers as visual indicators of the infant's perceptual abilities. 
Such techniques, however, have limitations. First, the observation may be unreliable in that two or more observers may not agree that the particular response occurred, or to what degree it occurred. Second, responses are difficult to quantify. Often the rapid and diffuse movements of the infant make it difficult to get an accurate record of the number of responses. The third, and most potent, limitation is that it is not possible to be certain that the infant's response was due to the stimulus presented or to a change from no stimulus to a stimulus. The infant may be respond ing to aspects of the stimulus different than those identified by the investigator. Therefore, when observational assessment is used as a technique for studying infant perceptual abilities, care must be taken not to overgeneralize from the data or to rely on one or two studies as conclusive evidence of a particular perceptual ability of the infant. 
Observational assessment techniques have become much more sophisticated, reducing the limitations just presented. Film analysis of the infant's responses, heart and respiration rate monitors, and nonnutritive sucking devices are used as effective tools in understanding infant perception. Film analysis permits researchers to carefully study the infant's responses over and over and in slow motion. Precise measurements can be made of the length and frequency of the infant's attention between two stimuli. Heart and respiration monitors provide the investigator with the number of heartbeats or breaths taken when a new stimulus is presented. Numerical increases are used as quantifiable indicators of heightened interest in the new stimulus. Increases in nonnutritive sucking were first used as an assessment measure by researchers in 1969. They devised an apparatus that connected a baby's pacifier' to a counting device. As stimuli were presented, changes in the infant's sucking behavior were recorded. Increases in the number of sucks were used as an indicator of the infant's attention to or preference for a given visual display. 
Two additional techniques of studying infant perception have come into vogue. The first is the habituation-di shabituation technique, in which a single stimulus is presented repeatedly to the infant until there is a measurable decline (habituation) in whatever attending behavior is being observed. At that point a new stimulus is presented, and any recovery (dishabituation) in responsiveness is recorded. If the infant fails to dishabituate and continues to show habituation with the new stimulus, it is assumed that the baby is unable to perceive the new stimulus as different. The habituation-dishabituation paradigm has been used most extensively with studies ; ...... ,2 . ":-..' i,; • d,' of auditory and olfactory perception in infants. The second technique relies on evoked potentials, which are electrical brain responses that may be related to a particular stimulus because of where they originate. Changes in the electrical pattern of the brain indicate that the stimulus is getting through to the infant's central nervous system and eliciting some form of response. 
Each of the preceding techniques provides the researcher with evidence that the infant can detect or discriminate between stimuli. With these sophisticated observational assessment and electro physiological measures, we know that the neonate of only a few days is far more perceptive than previously suspected. However, these measures are only "indirect" indicators of the infant's perceptual abilities. 
pacifier: a small plastic device for babies to suck or bite on Directions: Now answer the questions. 
In the study of perceptual abilities of infants, a number of techniques are used to determine infants' responses to various stimuli. Because they cannot verbalize or fill out questionnaires, indirect techniques of naturalistic observation are used as the primary means of determining what infants can see, hear, feel, and so forth. Each of these methods compares an infant's state prior to the introduction of a stimulus with its state during or immediately following the stimulus. The difference between the two measures provides the researcher with an indication of the level and duration of the response to the stimulus. For example, if a uniformly moving pattern of some sort is passed across the visual field of a neonate (newborn), repetitive following movements of the eye occur. The occurrence of these eye movements provides evidence that the moving pattern is perceived at some level by the newborn. Similarly, changes in the infant's general level of motor activity-turning the head, blinking the eyes, crying, and so forth-have been used by researchers as visual indicators of the infant's perceptual abilities. 
21. Why does the author mention "repetitive following movements of the eye"? 
A. To identify a response that indicates a neonate's perception of a stimulus 
B. To explain why a neonate is capable of responding to stimuli only through repetitive movements 
C. To argue that motor activity in a neonate may be random and unrelated to stimuli 
D. To emphasize that responses to stimuli vary in infants according to age 
Such techniques, however, have limitations. First, the observation may be unreliable in that two or more observers may not agree that the particular response occurred, or to what degree it occurred. Second, responses are difficult to quantify. Often the rapid and diffuse movements of the infant make it difficult to get an accurate record of the number of responses. The third, and most potent, limitation is that it is not possible to be certain that the infant's response was due to the stimulus presented or to a change from no stimulus to a stimulus. The infant may be responding to aspects of the stimulus different than those identified by the investigator. Therefore, when observational assessment is used as a technique for studying infant perceptual abilities, care must be taken not to overgeneralize from the data or to rely on one or two studies as conclusive evidence of a particular perceptual ability of the infant. 
22. Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 2 as a problem in using the technique of direct observatio n? 
A. It is impossible to be certain of the actual cause of an infant's response. 
B. Infants' responses, which occur quickly and diffusely, are often difficult to measure. 
C. Infants do not respond well to stimuli presented in an unnatural laboratory setting. 
D. It may be difficult for observers to agree on the presence or the degree of a response. 
23. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A. Researchers using observatio nal assessment techniques on infants must not overgenerali ze and must base their conclusions on data from many studies. 
B. On the basis of the data from one or two studies, it seems that some infants develop a particular perceptual ability not observed in others. 
C. To use data from one or two studies on infants' perceptual abilities, it is necessary to use techniques that will provide conclusive evidence. 
D. When researchers fail to make generalizations from their studies, their observed data is often inconclusive. 
Observat ional assessment techniques have become much more sophisticated, reducing the limitations just presented. Film analysis of the infant's responses, heart and respiration rate monitors, and nonnutritive sucking devices are used as effective tools in understanding infant perception. Film analysis permits researchers to carefully study the infant's responses over and over and in slow motion. Precise measure ments can be made of the length and frequency of the infant's attention between two stimuli. Heart and respiration monitors provide the investigator with the number of heartbeats or breaths taken when a new stimulus is presented. Numerical increases are used as quantifiable indicators of heightened interest in the new stimulus. Increases in nonnutritive sucking were first used as an assessment measure by researchers in 1969. They devised an apparatus that connected a baby's pacifier to a counting device. As stimuli were presented, changes in the infant's sucking behavior were recorded. Increases in the number of sucks were used as an indicator of the infant's attention to or preference for a given visual display. 
24. What is the author's primary purpose in paragraph 3? 
A. To explain why researchers must conduct more than one type of study when they are attempti ng to understand infant percepti on 
B. To describe new techniques for observing infant perception that overcome problems identified in the previous paragraph 
C. To present and evaluate the conclusions of various studies on infant perception 
D. To point out the strengths and weaknesses of three new methods for quantifying an infant's reaction to stimuli 
25. The word "quantifiable" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. visual 
B. permanent 
C. meaningful 
D. measurab le 
26. Paragraph 3 mentions all of the following as indications of an infant's heightened interest in a new stimulus EXCEPT an increase in 
A. sucking behavior 
B. heart rate 
C. the number of breaths taken 
D. eye movements 
Two additional techniques of studying infant perception have come into vogue. The first is the habituation-dishabituation technique, in which a single stimulus is presented repeatedly to the infant until there is a measurable decline (habituation) in whatever attending behavior is being observed. At that point a new stimulus is presented, and any recovery (dishabituation ) in responsiveness is recorded. If the infant fails to dishabitua te and continues to show habituation with the new stimulus, it is assumed that the baby is unable to perceive the new stimulus as different. The habituation-dishabituation paradigm has been used most extensively with studies of auditory and olfactory perception in infants. The second technique relies on evoked potentials, which are electrical brain responses that may be related to a particular stimulus because of where they originate. Changes in the electrical pattern of the brain indicate that the stimulus is getting through to the infant's central nervous system and eliciting some form of response. 
27. According to paragraph 4, which of the following leads to the conclusion that infants are able to differentiate between stimuli in a habituation-dishabituation study? 
A. Dishabitua tion occurs with the introduction of a new stimulus. 
B. Electrical responses in the infant's brain decline with each new stimulus. 
C. Habituation is continued with the introduction of a new stimulus. 
D. The infant displays little change in electrical brain responses. 
Each of the preceding techniques provides the researcher with evidence that the infant can detect or discriminate between stimuli. With these sophisticated observational assessment and electro physiological measures, we know that the neonate of only a few days is far more perceptive than previously suspected. However, these measures are only "indirect" indicators of the infant's perceptual abilities.
28. Paragraph 5 indicates that researchers who used the techniques described in the passage discovered that 
A. infants find it difficult to perceive some types of stimuli 
B. neonates of only a few days cannot yet discriminate between stimuli 
C. observational assessment is less useful for studying infant perception than researchers previously believed 
D. a neonate is able to perceive stimuli better than researchers once thought 
Observational assessment techniques have become much more sophisticated, reducing the limitations just presented. Film analysis of the infant's responses, heart and respiration rate monitors, and nonnutritive sucking devices are used as effective tools in understanding infant perception. (A) Film analysis permits researchers to carefully study the infant's responses over and over and in slow motion. (B) Precise measurements can be made of the length and frequency of the infant's attention between two stimuli. (C) Heart and respiration monitors provide the investigator with the number of heartbeats or breaths taken when a new stimulus is presented. (D) Numerical increases are used as quantifiable indicators of heightened interest in the new stimulus. Increases in nonnutritive sucking were first used as an assessment measure by researchers in 1969. They devised an apparatus that connected a baby's pacifier to a counting device. As stimuli were presented, changes in the infant's sucking behavior were recorded. 
Increases in the number of sucks were used as an indicator of the infant's attention to or preference for a given visual display. 
29. Directions: Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (B), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
The repetition allows researchers to observe the infant's behavior until they reach agreement about the presence and the degree of the infant's response. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B
C. Choice C
D. Choice D
30. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. 
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
Researchers use a number of techniques to determine how infants respond to changes in their environment . 
Answer Choices
Data from observational methods must be confirmed through multiple studies. 
[A] Visual indicators such as turning the head, blinking the eyes, or crying remain the best evidence of an infant's perceptual abilities. 
[B] New techniques for studying infant perception have improved the accuracy with which researchers observe and quantify infant responses. 
[C] Pacifiers are commonly used in studies to calm an infant who has been presented with excessive stimuli. 
[D] Indirect observation is most accurate when researchers use it to test auditory and olfactory perception in neonates. 
[E]] Sophisticated techniques that have aided new discoveries about perception in the neonate continue to be indirect measures.
LISTENING
This section measures your ability to understand conversations and lectures in English.
Listen to each conversation and lecture only one time. After each conversation and lecture, you will answer some questions about it. Answer each question based on what is stated or implied by the speakers. 
You may take notes while you listen and use your notes to help you answer the questions. Your notes will not be scored. 
Answer each question before moving on. Do not return to previous questions. 
It will take about 41 minutes to listen to the conversations and lectures and answer the questions about them. 
Directions: Listen to Track 104. 0 Directions: Now answer the questions. 
1. Why does the student go to see the professor? 
A. To report on the research he has done 
B. To ask for permission to observe a class 
C. To get help understanding an assignment 
D. To ask about a question on a recent test 
2. According to the professor, what should the student do after completing the first observation? 
A. Look for another child to observe 
B. Research the child's development al stage 
C. Report his progress to the class 
D. Submit the notes he took during the observation 
3. Why does the student mention a child playing with a toy car? 
A. To identify a behavior that would show a child's imagination developing 
B. To identify a behavior that might illustrate egocentric thinking 
C. To give an example of a behavior he has observed 
D. To give an example of a behavior he would not need to describe 
4. Why should the student contact the education department secretary? 
A. Her child attends a school run by the university. 
B. She has a list of families that might be able to help the man. 
C. She can contact students who have worked on a similar project. 
D. She will explain how to observe a class without disturbing it. 
5. Listen to Track 105. 0 
A. The man's paper has a strong introduction. 
B. The man has already started his research project. 
C. The assignment cannot be submitted late. 
D. The man does not fully understand the assignment. 
Directions: Listen to Track 106. 0 City Planning Directions: Now answer the questions. 
6. What is the main topic of the lecture? 
A. How the first pedestrian mall was developed 
B. How pedestrian malls have affected business in America 
C. Key considerations in creating a pedestrian mall 
D. Ways that cities can better use pedestrian malls 
7. According to the professor, what is the basic reason for building pedestrian malls in the city center? 
A. To increase retail activity in the area 
B. To reduce the noise made by automobile traffic 
C. To increase shopping convenie nces for city residents 
D. To encourage people to move from the suburbs back into the city center 
8. What are two aspects of location that need to be considered when planning a pedestrian mall? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] The proximity to the customer base 
[B] The number of nearby tourist sites 
[C] The variety of restaurants in the area 
[D] The access to public transportation 
9. Why does the professor explain the design of a pedestrian mall? 
A. To illustrate its importance to the success of a pedestrian mall 
B. To explain why pedestrian malls are so appealing to shoppers 
C. To point out how a pedestrian mall looks different from other malls 
D. To show how the design is more important than the location 
10. Why does the professor mention the Louisville, Kentucky, pedestrian mall? 
A. To discuss her favorite pedestrian mall to visit 
B. To illustrate how a pedestrian mall can overcome financial difficulties
C. To give an example of a typical American pedestrian mall
D. To show how poor planning can affect the success of a pedestrian mall 
11. Listen to Track 107. 0 
A. Art is of little importance in designing a pedestrian mall. 
B. There should be a wide variety of art on display in pedestrian malls. 
C. Art is a key feature in the designing of a pedestria n mall. 
D. Most pedestrian mall desig ners do not like art as much as she does.
Directions: Listen to Track 108. 0 Ecology ,.,•,(!� Directions: Now answer the questions. 
12. What is the class mainly discussin g? 
A. How beavers select the ecosystems where they live 
B. How ecosystems differ from one another 
C. The impact of human activities on an ecosystem 
D. The role of one species in an ecosystem 
13. Why does the professor interrupt the student when he first mentions European settlement in North America? 
A. She had already mentioned that point. 
B. She thinks the information he gave is unrelated to the topic. 
C. She prefers to present the information in the lecture in a specific order. 
D. She questions the accuracy of his point. 
14. What does the professor say about still water and swiftly flowing water? 
A. Beavers cannot adapt to living near swiftly flowing water. 
B. Still water and swiftly flowing water support similar ecosystems. 
C. Still water supports more life than swiftly flowing water. 
D. Wetland areas include large quantities of swiftly flowing water. 
15. Accordin g to the professor, what was the impact of the extensive hunting of beavers in North America? 
A. It led to a decrease in the number of wetlands. 
B. It led to a decrease in the number of swiftly flowing streams. 
C. It led to an increase in the number of other animal species in the wetlands. 
D. It led to an increase in the amount of groundwater. 
16. Listen to Track 109. 0 
A. To point out that some terms have different meanings in other fields 
B. To indicate that she is not going to explain the term 
C. To defend a point she made earlier about ecosystems 
D. To clarify a term used in biology 
17. Listen to Track 110. 0 
A. Beaver dams would cause floods in many areas where people now live. 
B. Beaver dams would cause most of the water supply to be inaccessible. 
C. Large areas of land would become unusable by humans. 
D. More groundwater would be available for human consumptio n. 
Directions: Listen to Track 111. 0 Directions: Now answer the questions. 
18. What are the speakers mainly discussing? 
A. How to use the language lab 
B. How to make a video for class 
C. How to reserve a study room in the library 
D. How to improve study habits 
19. How is the language lab different from the library? 
A. The language lab closes much earlier than the library does. 
B. More students go to the library after dinner than to the language lab. 
C. Students cannot remove educatio nal materials from the language lab. 
D. There are more rooms where students can work in groups in the library. 
20. When can students reserve a room in the language lab? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] When they arrive at the lab 
[B] After their professor signs a certain form 
[C] When all the members of a study group have signed in 
[D] The day before they want to use a room 
21. What will the student probably do next? 
A. Ask a classmate to watch a video with him 
B. Sign out a Spanish video 
C. Find out when the video he needs will be available 
D. Buy a copy of the video series 
22. Listen to Track 112. 0 
A. She confused the man for another student who had visited the lab earlier in the day. 
B. The man is mistaken about how many videos are in the series. 
C. The languag e lab does not own the whole series of videos the man needs. 
D. The man is not familiar with the procedures used at the languag e lab.
Directions: Listen to Track 113. 0 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
23. What is the main purpose of the talk? 
A. To investigate the information known about the troubadours 
B. To explain the role of patriotic poetry during medieval times 
C. To explain why opinions about knights changed during the medieval period 
D. To compare two different types of medieval poems 
24. According to the professor, who was the intended audience for chanson poetry? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] Lords
[B] Ladies 
[C] Knights 
[D] Troubadours 
25. According to the professor, what is true about the hero in chanson poetry and the hero in romance poetry? Put a check (./)in the correct boxes. 
Chanson Hero Romance Hero Is admired for loyalty to country Engages in conflict for adventure Is willing to face extreme dangers to protect the lord Is concerned with individual improvement 26. Why does the professor mention that romance poems often included biographical sketches? 
A. To emphasize the similarities between chanson authors and romance authors 
B. To explain why the social status of troubadours is known today 
C. To point out why the biographical sketches are reliable sources of information 
D. To provide evidence that many troubadours were also historians 
27. What does the professor say about the political climate during the time troubadours were writing poetry? 
28. 
A. It enabled chanson poetry to gain wide popularity over romance poetry. 
B. It gave the troubadours time to devote themselves to writing poetry. 
C. It inspired troubadours to write poetry that described their lord's deeds. 
D. It made it difficult for troubadours to travel safely within their country. 
Listen to Track 114. 0 
A. To indicate that he understands why the student may be confused 
B. To emphasize that the student has asked a very important question 
C. To remind the student that she may know the answer to her own question 
D. To invite other members of the class to answer the question
SPEAKING
This section measures your ability to speak in English about a variety of topics.
There are four questions in this section. For each question, you will be given a short time to prepare your response. When the preparation time is up, answer the question as completely as possible in the time indicated for that question. You should record your responses so that you can review them later and compare them with the notes in the Answers section and scoring rubrics. 
1. You will now be asked to give your opinion about a familiar topic. Give yourself 15 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 45 seconds. 
Listen to Track 115. 0 
When looking for information for a research project, some students prefer to get their information mainly from the Internet. Others prefer to mainly use printed materials such as books and academic journals. Which do you prefer, and why? 
Preparation Time: 15 seconds 
Response Time: 45 seconds 
2. You will now read a short passage and listen to a conversation on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 116. 0 
Reading Time: 45 seconds 
New Stadium A university official announced plans to spend $2 million to build a new athletic stadium, commenting that a new stadium would help the university achieve its goal of attracting more top students. The official also said that, additionally, building a new stadium would allow the university to strengthen its relationship with the town since a new and larger stadium would have the space to seat not only students, parents, and alumni, but members of the local community as well. 
Listen to Track 117. 0 
The woman expresses her opinion about the university's plan. State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds 
3. You will now read a short passage and listen to a lecture on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 118. 0 
Reading Time: 5O seconds 
Perceptual Constancy How an object affects our senses depends in part on external conditions, and these conditions are always changing. An object viewed from one angle presents a different shape to our eye than when viewed from another angle; similarly, as the distance from which we view an object changes, the object will appear larger or smaller. In spite of this, even as conditions change and we see objects differently, we still recognize that they remain the same. This is what is known as perceptual constancy. If not for perceptual constancy, we might have difficulty recognizing familiar objects if we viewed them in a new and different context. Listen to Track 119. 0 Explain what is meant by perceptual constancy, using the examples provided by the professor. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds
 Response Time: 60 secon ds 
 4. You will now listen to part of a lecture. You will then be asked a question about it. After you hear the question, give yourself 20 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 120. 0 Using the examples of the leafy sea dragon and the cuttlefish, describe two kinds of camouflage and the benefits they provide. 
Preparation Time: 20 seconds Response Time: 60 seconds
WRITING
This section measures your ability to write in English to communicate in an academic environment.
There are two writing questions in this section. 
For question l, you will read a passage and listen to a lecture about the same topic. You may take notes while you read and listen. Then you will write a response to a question based on what you have read and heard. You may look back at the passage when answering the question. You may use your notes to help you answer the question. You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. 
For question 2, you will write an essay based on your own knowledge and experience. You have 30 minutes to plan and complete your essay. 
Directions: Give yourself 3 minutes to read the passage. 
Reading Time: 3 minutes 
Private collectors have been selling and buying fossils, the petrified remains of ancient organisms, ever since the eighteenth century. In recent years, however, the sale of fossils, particularly of dinosaurs and other large vertebrates, has grown into a big business. Rare and important fossils are now being sold to private ownership for millions of dollars. This is an unfortunate development for both scientists and the general public. 
The public suffers because fossils that would otherwise be donated to museums where everyone can see them are sold to private collectors who do not allow the public to view their collections. Making it harder for the public to see fossils can lead to a decline in public interest in fossils, which would be a pity. 
More importantly, scientists are likely to lose access to some of the most important fossils and thereby miss out on potentially crucial discoveries about extinct life forms. Wealthy fossil buyers with a desire to own the rarest and most important fossils can spend virtually limitless amounts of money to acquire them. Scientists and the museums and universities they work for often cannot compete successfully for fossils against millionaire fossil buyers. 
Moreover, commercial fossil collectors often destroy valuable scientific evidence associated with the fossils they unearth. Most commercial fossil collectors are untrained or uninterested in carrying out the careful field work and document ation that reveal the most about animal life in the past. For example, scientists have learned about the biology of nest-buildi ng dinosaurs called oviraptors by carefully observing the exact position of oviraptor fossils in the ground and the presence of other fossils in the immediate surround ings. Commercial fossil collectors typically pay no attention to how fossils lie in the ground or to the smaller fossils that may surround bigger ones. 
Listen to Track 121. 0 
Directions: You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. Your response will be judged on the basis of the quality of your writing and on how well your response presents the points in the lecture and their relationship to the reading passage. Typically, an effective response will be 150 to 225 words. 
Listen to Track 122. 0 
Response Time: 20 minutes 
1. Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they oppose specific points made in the reading passage. :'iTypically, an effective response will contain a minimum of 300 words. 
Response Time: 30 minutes 
2. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? 
The extended family (grandparents, cousins, aunts, and uncles) is less important now than it was in the past. 
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. Be sure to use your own words. 
Do not use memorized examples.
ANSWERS
1. C 12. B 
2. A 13. D 
3. C 14. A 
4. D 15. B 
5. B 16. A 
6. C 17. c 
7. D 18. B 
8. A 19. B 
9. B 20. B,C, F 
10. A,E,D C 11. A 
Primary groups 
Developing socially
Involving close relationships
roviding meaning for life situations
Secondary groups
Viewing people as a acceptable behavior means to an end 
21. A 
22. C 
23. A 
24. B 
25. D 
26. D 
27. A 
28. D 
29. B 
30. A, C, F
Listening Section 
1. C 
2. B 
3. A 
4. B 
5. D 
6. C
7. A 
8. A,D 
9. A 
10. D 
11. A 
12. D 
13. C
14. C 
15. A 
16. D 
17. D 
18. A 
19. C 
20. A, D
21. B 
22. D 
23. D 
24. A,C 
25. Chanson Hero Romance Hero 
Is admired for loyalty to country Engages in conflict for adventure 
Is willing to face extreme dangers to protect the lord 
Is concerned with individual improvement 
26. B 
27. B 
28. C 
Speaking Section Prompts, Important Points, and Sample Responses with Rater Comme nts Use the sample Independent and Integrated Speaking Rubrics in Appendix A to see how responses are scored. The raters who listen to your responses will analyze them in three general categories. These categories are Delivery, Language Use, and Topic Development. All three categories have equal importance. 
This section includes important points that should be covered when answering each question. All of these points must be present in a response in order for it to receive the highest score in the Topic Development category. These important points are guides to the kind of information raters expect to hear in a high-level response. 
This section also refers to sample responses, which can be found on the audio tracks. Some responses were scored at the highest level, which others were not. The responses are followed by comments from certified ETS raters. 
1: Paired Choice 
Prompt 
When looking for information for a research project, some students prefer to get their information mainly from the Internet. Others prefer to mainly use printed materials such as books and academic journals. Which do you prefer, and why? 
Important Points 
Speakers should both state their preference and provide support for their choice, such as preferring the internet because it allows for faster research, or preferring printed materials because they are more reliable sources. There are many ways to successfully support a choice. Speakers may provide one overarching reason and elaborate on it, or provide several different reasons. They may provide concrete examples or general logic. It is also acceptable for speakers to say they find both internet and printed materials useful in doing research, but speakers would need to clearly explain why and under what circumstances each type of source is appropriate, and this would be difficult for many speakers to do in the time given. In all cases, the listener should be able to easily follow why the speaker holds that opinion. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 123. O 
Rater Comments 
The speaker clearly states his preference (using the internet to find information for a research project) and why he prefers it ("because you have a wider range of information from the internet"). He then goes on to elaborate on his reasons, explaining why printed materials are not as convenient ("if you need a particular type of information you need to go and search for a particular journal") and comparing them to the internet. Although he does not give specific examples, his reasons are full and clear. The lack of examples is acceptable since this particular prompt did not ask for them. A noticeable accent and occasional mispronunciations do not prevent the listener from easily understanding the response. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 124. O 
Rater Comments 
The speaker states her preference ("I prefer to research some information from the internet") and provides some support for her choice ("It is easier and faster to access some informations"). However, beyond that initial statement, only a moderate amount of relevant support is provided. The speaker has some language limitations that prevent her from providing full support: she speaks slowly and with hesitation, and does not successfully use a wide variety of vocabula ry or grammatical structures. She also includes information whose relevance is not clear. For example, she says,"/ can not only save my time, but also exchange opinions with others easily." It is not obvious what exchanging opinions with others has to do with getting information for a research project, and the speaker does not explain the connection. 
2: Fit and Explain
Prompt
The woman expresses her opinion about the university's plan. State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion. 
Important Points
In this question, you should use the reading and listening passages to describe the university's plan (to spend money to build a new stadium), state the woman's opinion about the plan, and explain the reasons why the woman disagrees with the plan. The woman disagrees with the idea that a new stadium will attract top students because she thinks that other facilities in the university are in poor condition- including the science labs, the library, and the student centerand that money should be spent on them before a new stadium . She also disagrees that a new stadium would attract people from the local community because she thinks people don't come because the teams always lose and a larger stadium wouldn't change that. 
High-level Response: Listen to Track 125. 0
Rater Comments
The speaker gives a full response. He organizes the response well, devoting equal time to the woman's two reasons and covering most of the material in the important points above. Note that providing every detail of the plan or the woman's reasons is not a requirement for full credit; when discussing the poor facilities, for example, the man simply says "like the library, and other places." His vocabula ry and language use is precise and appropriate throughout for the most part, though there are a few minor errors that do not interfere with comprehension. Pronunciation is good overall, but there is some evident hesitation throughout. The response could be more fluid, but it is not choppy to the point that it creates listener effort. -. 
Mid-level Response: Listen to Track 126.0
Rater Comments 
The speaker does address all of the main points, but they are not develope d fully. For one, he does not clearly state at the beginning what the plan is (to build a new stadium); this is important for the listener to understand the response fully. He also leaves out other important information, such as the condition of the other facilities he mentions, which is again important in order to understand the woman's opinion. He does include a transition ("second , she says ... ") before discussing her second reason, which helps organization. Though the response is understandable, the language is often imprecise and demonstrates a limited range of vocabulary and grammatical structures (for example, "Only new stadium cannot invite top students"). The speech is generally intelligible, but pronunciation problems, mainly with individual sounds, and hesitations when searching for language do create some listener effort. 
3: General/Specific 
Prompt 
Explain what is meant by perceptual constancy , using the examples provided by the professor. 
Important Points 
This task asks you to explain how the examples given by the professor in the lecture illustrate the concept of perceptual constancy from the reading. There are different ways you can organize your response. You might begin by explaining that perceptual constancy is the idea that even though objects appear different depending on external conditions, we are able to recognize that they are the same objects. Or you might choose to begin with the examples and conclude with a summary of the theory of perceptual constancy. Either approach is acceptable, but you should be sure to include both examples in your response (a plate may look round or oval depending on the angle from which we look at it, but we still recognize it as a plate; and the professor may appear smaller when viewed from the back of the room [instead of the front), but we still understand that the professor is the same person, and that he has not gotten smaller). 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 127.0
Rater Comments
This speaker's pronunciation is very clear, and her response is well-organized and easy for the listener to follow. She explains the examples from the lecture first, and defines the concept later. This is a different but effective approach to answering the prompt. Her word choice and expression is not always perfect. For example, when defining the concept of perceptual constancy she says, "we know by distance and angle ... it doesn't look the same." This is a somewhat vague statement. She could have used a clearer and more complex sentence like, "Even though an object looks different when viewed from a different angle or distance, we know it is the same object." Nevertheless, her delivery is fluid, and she is able to construct long, clear phrases in the explanation of the examples " ... a professor in a front row, he looks bigger than you see the professor in the back row, but ... without even thinking, you know that it's the same professor, and the same guy who's lecturing." Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 128.0 
Rater Comments 
This speaker covers most of the information required of the task, but his response is not as clear or efficient as that of the high-level speaker. His word choice is imprecise and at times causes difficulty for the listener. For instance, he says, " ... perceptual constancy means you may remain same ideas when looking at something from different aspects."The phrase "You may remain same ideas" is not grammatically correct and the use of the term "ideas" is rather vague in meaning. The speaker could have more accurately expressed the idea as "continue to recognize an object." Also, he uses the word "aspect" instead of "angle" or "perspect ive," which is confusing for the listener. The speaker's pronunciation is relatively clear, but he repeats words and phrases often, which is at times distracting and requires some effort from the listener to follow his response. Overall, there is some evidence that he understood the reading and lecture, but limitations in grammar and vocabulary prevent him from expressing some of the ideas clearly. 
4:Summary 
Prompt
Using the examples of the leafy sea dragon and the cuttlefish, describe two kinds of camouflage and the benefits they provide. 
Important Points 
When answering this question, you should provide a summary of the lecture in order to describe the two different kinds of camouflage the professor talks about and how the types of camouflage protect the animals that use them. You should explain that some sea animals have permanent camouflage (like their colors and shapes) that blend in with their specific environment, and describe the example of the leafy sea dragon, which is green and looks like the leaves it is surrounded by. You should also explain that other animals have camouflage that changes colors to match whatever environment the animals are in, so that they can move around and still be protected. For example, the cuttlefish can turn brown when it is swimming over the sea floor, and green when it is swimming near plants. 
High-level Response: Listen to Track 129.0
Rater Comments
This speaker provides a full, complete summary of the lecture. He describes the two types of camouflage, the examples of the sea creatures that use the types of camouflage and how the camouflage benefits them, as well as how the types of camouflage differ from each other. He makes use of complex structures, such as "the cuttlefish is different from the sea dragon in that it doesn't have ... " and makes only minor errors. His pronunciation and delivery in general are very clear. His intonation is somewhat flat, which may cause some listener effort. Even though this is a high-level response, the speaker could benefit from increased attention to stress at the sentence level and using intonation more for emphasis. Overall, the response is complete and highly intelligible. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 130.0 
Rater Comments
This speaker provides a mostly complete response. It contains a description of what camouflage is and why it is useful, as well as explanations of the two sea creatures and how they use camouflage. The speaker could have provided a stronger response, however, if he had provided more information about the differences between the two types of camouflage (he mentioned that cuttlefish can change their color and shape, but didn't contrast this with the sea dragon's permanent camoufla ge). His hesitation between words and within words is at times distracting, but overall his message is clear. 
The speaker would likely benefit from working on agreement (between subjects and verbs and between modifiers and nouns) and more advanced vocabulary (to avoid confusing phrases such as "two different method," "the cuttlefish is another examples," and "they shape any type any colors"). This section includes topic notes that are guides to the kind of information raters expect to read in a high-level response. 
Writing Section 
Prompts, Topic Notes, and Sample Responses with Rater Comments 
Use the sample Integrated and Independent Writing Rubrics in Appendix A to see how responses are scored. 
This section also refers to sample responses, which can be found on the audio tracks. These Aresponses were scored at the highest level. 
The responses are followed by comments from certified ETS raters. 
Question 1 
Prompt 
Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they oppose specific points made in the reading passage. 
Topic Notes
The reading discusses reasons why collecting and selling fossils for commercial purposes (for profit only), which now happens much more frequently than it did in the past, is a bad practice. The lecturer explains that these reasons are not convincing , and that the benefits from having more commercial operations collect fossils these days are worth the drawbacks. 
Point made in the reading 
When fossils are sold to private collectors , it means that museums will have fewer of them, and in turn the general public will have fewer chances to see them. 
It will also mean that scientists will lose opportunities to make discoveries from studying fossils, since they won't have access to really important ones. 
Because most commercial fossil collectors are untrained , they will destroy important scientific evidence that scientists could have obtained had they been the ones to collect the fossils. 
Corresponding point from the lecture 
The general public will have more chances to see them; commercial fossil collecting is making more fossils available , so many more public institutions can now buy them. 
Even if important fossils are sold to private collectors , scientists would still see the fossils because they have to be identified first by scientists. 
Even if some damage is done, it is better than having fossils go undiscovered , which was more likely to have been the case when only scientists were doing the collecting. 
Responses with scores of 4 and 5 typically discuss all three points in the table. 
Sample Response 
Unlike the passage, which focuses on the negative sides of fossil trade, the lecture focuses on the benefits of having a fossil market. 
First of all, the passage mentions that the fossils will be less exposed to the public's eye if they are owned by collectors , because they will not be donated to public museums. However , the professor argues that by letting all institutions to have the opportunity to purchase fossils, even the lower level public institutions such as libraries can purchase the fossils for display, which can be viewed by many people. 
Secondly , the professor opposes to the passage's opinion that the scientists would miss out on the important information given by fossils possessed by wealthy collectors. The professor brings up a point that all fossils need to be scientifically identified and carefully investigated by certified scientists before going into the market. 
Lastly, although it may be true that the collectors may damage the fossils, it is better to have them find it and damage it than to never find the fossils. There are not many fossil searching activities going on, and without the help of the collectors , many of the fossils probably would not have even been found. Taking that into consideration, it is certainly better to have some information from the fossils than to have none at all. 
Rater Comments
This response earns a score of 5. It is a wellorganized response that successfully explains the opposing relationship between the reading and the lecture. The three main points from the lecture are clearly identified , and the writer has provided relevant details or explanations for each of those main points. The writer's expression "There are not many fossil searching activities going on ... " in the third point is somewhat vague, since the idea conveyed by the lecturer is actually that there are currently not that many fossil collecting efforts specifically by universities and scientific institutions. So the writer's idea here does not correspond to what the lecture is implying, which is that nowadays, because commercial operations started increasing their fossil hunting activities in recent years, between the large number of commercial operations and the limited activity of universities and scientific institutions, there is quite a lot of fossil searching activity going on. However, the lecturer's main idea, that without the commercial collectors, many fossils would go undiscovered, is conveyed. Overall, content from the lecture points is presented precisely, and the very few language errors in the response do not interfere with meaning. 
Question 2 
Prompt 
Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? 
The extended family (grandparents, cousins, aunts, and uncles) is less important now than it was in the past. 
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. 
Topic Notes 
This topic asks you to compare the importance of extended family now and in the past. If you agree with the statement, you might want to discuss factors that have caused this to happen such as family members having to move far distances away from their hometown for their jobs. If you disagree with the statement, you might support your answer by explaining that in certain parts of the world, it is still very common for extended family members to play important roles in one another's day-to-day lives, and you might describe how this works. No matter which position you take, it is fine to include your personal opinion about the effects of changes over time to the importance of the extended family (for example, many writers comment that this .
change has generally been bad for society); that is appropriate for this task, as long as it is part of a well-develo ped response that includes sufficient explanation and details. 
Sample Response 
I agree with the statement that the extended family has become less important than it was before. In the past, there were the threats of bombings in the cold war or money depressions that place higher important on sticking and working together. However, there has been a change in the values of our world today that have severed many important relations between family members. 
First, with new technology, older generations of grandparents and some aunts and uncles may be separated into a different world. One example is instant messaging and email; most young people use these ways to talk constantly with friends and other people, and consider this more exciting and important than talking with extended family members. 
Also, students today are becoming more and more busy with school, after school activities, and homework. High achieving students take numerous advanced classes, overload on homework, and have little time to spend time with the other members of the family. Other children are constantly involved in after school sports and activities that take up most of their time. Because of the more importance placed on good grades, better test scores, and after school activities, the significance of the extended family has been decreasi ng. 
Finally, families are becoming farther apart because of distance. Gone are the times in which families lived close together or in the same house, and have evenings with quality family times. In my case, I live halfway across the planet from the rest of my family and only get a few moments to talk on the phone with them every few months and a few weeks together during school vacation. Some other family members live so far away that I rarely get to talk to them, let alone meet them. 
Therefore, the extended family has become less important because other values and factors have come into place. There is less communication going between them, less time to spend together, and more distance to travel to be with them. Extended family members have become quite separated from the rest of the family than in the past. 
Rater Comments
The writer of this 5-level response agrees with the idea that extended family has become less important, and provides three reasons for this: widespread use of technology, busy lives of family members, and the distances separating family members. Each one of those points is well developed, and includes appropriate details and explanations; for the first point, specific types of technology and how people use them are referenced, for the second point, there is an explanation of how or in what ways children are busy these days, and for the third point, a personal example illustrates the idea that family members living far apart makes staying in touch harder. The organization is good and transitional sentences are used appropriately ("However, there has been a change ... "). Throughout the response there are many examples of appropriate word choice, syntactic variety, and idiomaticity. Grammatical and lexical errors (for example, "families are becoming farther apart" instead of, perhaps, "families are growing farther apart") are very few and minor, and they do not interfere with meaning.