TPO1
TPO1-1 Groundwater
1.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 1 about the ground that we walk on?
A.It cannot hold rainwater for long periods of time.
B.It prevents most groundwater from circulating.
C.It has the capacity to store large amounts of water.
D.It absorbs most of the water it contains from rivers
2.The word " out of sight " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.far away
B.hidden
C.partly visible
D.discovered
3.According to paragraph 2, where is groundwater
usually found?
A.Inside pieces of sand and gravel
B.On top of beds of rock
C.In fast rivers that are flowing beneath the soil
D.In spaces between pieces of sediment
4.The phrase " glacial outwash " in the passage refers to
A.fast rivers
B.glaciers
C.the huge volumes of water created by glacial
melting
D.the particles carried in water from melting glaciers
Groundwater is the word used to describewater that saturates the ground, filling all the available
spaces. By far the most abundant type of groundwater
is meteoric water; this is the groundwater that
circulates as part of the water cycle. Ordinary
meteoric water is water that has soaked into the
ground from the surface, from precipitation (rain and
snow) and from lakes and streams. There it remains,
sometimes for long periods, before emerging at thesurface again. At first thought it seems incredible that
there can be enough space in the "solid" ground
underfoot to hold all this water.
The necessary space is there, however, in many forms.
The commonest spaces are those among the
particles—sand grains and tiny pebbles—of loose,
unconsolidated sand and gravel. Beds of this material,out of sight beneath the soil, are common. They are
found wherever fast rivers carrying loads of coarse
sediment once flowed. For example, as the great ice
sheets that covered North America during the last ice
age steadily melted away, huge volumes of water
flowed from them. The water was always laden withpebbles, gravel, and sand, known as glacial outwash ,
that was deposited as the flow slowed down.
5.The word " plugged " in the passage is closet in
meaning to
A.washed
B.dragged
C.filled up
D.soaked through
The same thing happens to this day, though on a
smaller scale, wherever a sediment-laden river or
stream emerges from a mountain valley onto relatively
flat land, dropping its load as the current slows: the
water usually spreads out fanwise, depositing the
sediment in the form of a smooth, fan-shaped slope.
Sediments are also dropped where a river slows on
entering a lake or the sea, the deposited sediments
are on a lake floor or the seafloor at first, but will be
located inland at some future date, when the sea level
falls or the land rises; such beds are sometimes
thousands of meters thick.
In lowland country almost any spot on the ground mayoverlie what was once the bed of a river that has since
become buried by soil; if they are now below the
water's upper surface (the water table), the gravels
and sands of the former riverbed, and its sandbars,
will be saturated with groundwater.
So much for unconsolidated sediments. Consolidated
(or cemented) sediments, too, contain millions of
minute water-holding pores. This is because the gapsamong the original grains are often not totally plugged
with cementing chemicals; also, parts of the original
grains may become dissolved by percolating
groundwater, either while consolidation is taking place
or at any time afterwards. The result is that sandstone,
for example, can be as porous as the loose sand from
which it was formed.
6.According to paragraphs 6 and 7, why is basalt unlike
most crystalline forms of rock?
A.It is unusually solid.
B.It often has high porosity.
C.It has a low proportion of empty space.
D.It is highly permeable
7.What is the main purpose of paragraph 7?
A.To explain why water can flow through rock
B.To emphasize the large amount of empty space in all
rock
C.To point out that a rock cannot be both porous and
permeable
D.To distinguish between two related properties of
rock
Thus a proportion of the total volume of any sediment,
loose or cemented, consists of empty space. Most
crystalline rocks are much more solid; a common
exception is basalt, a form of solidified volcanic lava,
which is sometimes full of tiny bubbles that make it
very porous.
The proportion of empty space in a rock is known as
its porosity. But note that porosity is not the same as
permeability, which measures the ease with which
water can flow through a material; this depends on
the sizes of the individual cavities and the crevices
linking them.
Much of the water in a sample of water-saturated
sediment or rock will drain from it if the sample is put
in a suitable dry place. But some will remain, clinging
to all solid surfaces. It is held there by the force of
surface tension without which water would drain
instantly from any wet surface, leaving it totally dry.
The total volume of water in the saturated sample
must therefore be thought of as consisting of water
that can, and water that cannot, drain away.
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Surface tension is not strong enough to retain drops
of water in rocks with large pores but it strong enough
to hold on to thin films of water in rocks with small
pores.
B.Water in rocks is held in place by large pores and
drains away from small size pores through surface
tension.
C.Small pores and large pores both interact with
surface tension to determine whether a rock will hold
water as heavy drops or as a thin film.
D.If the force of surface tension is too weak to hold
water in place as heavy drops, the water will continue
to be held firmly in place as a thin film when large
pores exist.
The relative amount of these two kinds of water varies
greatly from one kind of rock or sediment to another,
even though their porosities may be the same. Whathappens depends on pore size. If the pores are large,
the water in them will exist as drops too heavy for
surface tension to hold, and it will drain away; but if
the pores are small enough, the water in them will
exist as thin films, too light to overcome the force of
surface tension holding them in place; then the
water will be firmly held.
Much of the water in a sample of water-saturated sediment or rock will drain from it if the sample is put in a
suitable dry place. But some will remain, clinging to all solid surfaces. It is held there by the force of surface
tension without which water would drain instantly from any wet surface, leaving it totally dry. The total volume
of water in the saturated sample must therefore be thought of as consisting of water that can, and water that
cannot, drain away. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
What, then, determines what proportion of the water stays and what proportion drains away?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Much of the ground is actually saturated with water.
A. Sediments that hold water were spread by glaciers and are still spread by rivers and streams.
B. Water is stored underground in beds of loose sand and gravel or in cemented sediment.
C. The size of a saturated rock 's pores determines how much water it will retain when the rock is put in a dry
place.
D. Groundwater often remains underground for a long time before it emerges again.
E. Like sandstone, basalt is a crystalline rock that is very porous.
F. Beds of unconsolidated sediments are typically located at inland sites that were once underwater.
TPO1-2 The Origins of Theater
1.The word “ championed ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.changed
B.debated
C.created
D.supported
2.According to paragraph 1, why did some societies
develop and repeat ceremonial actions?
A.To establish a positive connection between the
members of the society
B.To help society members better understand the
forces controlling their food supply
C.To distinguish their beliefs from those of other
societies
D.To increase the society 's prosperity
In seeking to describe the origins of theater, one must
rely primarily on speculation, since there is little
concrete evidence on which to draw. The most widelyaccepted theory, championed by anthropologists in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
envisions theater as emerging out of myth and ritual.
The process perceived by these anthropologists may
be summarized briefly. During the early stages of its
development, a society becomes aware of forces that
appear to influence or control its food supply and
well-being. Having little understanding of natural
causes, it attributes both desirable and undesirable
occurrences to supernatural or magical forces, and it
searches for means to win the favor of these forces.
Perceiving an apparent connection between certain
actions performed by the group and the result it
desires, the group repeats, refines and formalizes
those actions into fixed ceremonies, or rituals.
3.The word “ this” in the passage refers to
A.the acting out of rites
B.the divorce of ritual performers from the rest of
society
C.the separation of myths from rites
D.the celebration of supernatural forces
4.According to paragraph 2, what may cause societies
to abandon certain rites?
A.Emphasizing theater as entertainment
B.Developing a new understanding of why events
occur
C.Finding a more sophisticated way of representing
mythical characters
D.Moving from a primarily oral tradition to a more
written tradition
Stories (myths) may then grow up around a ritual.
Frequently the myths include representatives of those
supernatural forces that the rites celebrate or hope to
influence. Performers may wear costumes and masks
to represent the mythical characters or supernatural
forces in the rituals or in accompanying celebrations.
As a person becomes more sophisticated, its
conceptions of supernatural forces and causal
relationships may change. As a result, it may abandon
or modify some rites. But the myths that have grown
up around the rites may continue as part of the
group's oral tradition and may even come to be acted
out under conditions divorced from these rites. Whenthis occurs, the first step has been taken toward
theater as an autonomous activity, and thereafter
entertainment and aesthetic values may gradually
replace the former mystical and socially efficacious
concerns.
Although origin in ritual has long been the most
popular, it is by no means the only theory about how
the theater came into being.
Storytelling has been
proposed as one alternative.
Under this theory,
relating and listening to stories are seen as
fundamental human pleasures.
Thus, the recalling of
an event (a hunt, battle, or other feat) is elaborated
through the narrator 's pantomime and impersonation
and eventually through each role being assumed by a
different person.
5.All of following are mentioned in paragraph 5 as
possible reasons that led societies to develop theater
EXCEPT
A.Theater allows people to face that they are afraid of.
B.Theater gives an opportunity to imagine a better
reality.
C.Theater is a way to enjoy imitating other people.
D.Theater provides people the opportunity to better
understand the human mind.
6.Which of the following best describes the
organization of paragraph 5?
A.The author presents two theories for a historical
phenomenon.
B.The author argues against theories expressed earlier
in the passage.
C.The author argues for replacing older theories with a
new one.
D.The author points out problems with two popular
theories.
A closely related theory sees theater as evolving out of
dances that are primarily pantomimic, rhythmical or
gymnastic, or from imitations of animal noises and
sounds. Admiration for the performer's skill, virtuosity,
and grace are seen as motivation for elaborating the
activities into fully realized theatrical performances.
In addition to exploring the possible antecedents of
theater, scholars have also theorized about the
motives that led people to develop theater. Why did
theater develop, and why was it valued after it ceased
to fulfill the function of ritual? Most answers fall back
on the theories about the human mind and basic
human needs. One, set forth by Aristotle in the fourth
century B.C., sees humans as naturally imitative—as
taking pleasure in imitating persons, things, and
actions and in seeing such imitations. Another,
advanced in the twentieth century, suggests that
humans have a gift for fantasy, through which they
seek to reshape reality into more satisfying forms than
those encountered in daily life. Thus, fantasy or fiction
(of which drama is one form) permits people to
objectify their anxieties and fears, confront them, and
fulfill their hopes in fiction if not fact. The theater,
then, is one tool whereby people define and
understand their world or escape from unpleasant
realities.
7.The word “ penchant ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.compromise
B.inclination
C.tradition
D.respect
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.A society's rites were more likely to be retained in
the oral tradition if its myths were admired for artistic
qualities.
B.The artistic quality of a myth was sometimes an
essential reason for a society to abandon it from the
oral tradition.
C.Some early societies stopped using myths in their
religious practices when rites ceased to be seen as
useful for social well-being.
D.Myths sometimes survived in a society's tradition
because of their artistic qualities even after they were
no longer deemed religiously beneficial.
But neither the human imitative instinct nor a
penchant for fantasy by itself leads to an autonomous
theater. Therefore, additional explanations are needed.
One necessary condition seems to be a somewhat
detached view of human problems. For example, one
sign of this condition is the appearance of the comic
vision, since comedy requires sufficient detachment to
view some deviations from social norms as ridiculous
rather than as serious threats to the welfare of the
entire group. Another condition that contributes to
the development of autonomous theater is theemergence of the aesthetic sense. For example, some
early societies ceased to consider certain rites
essential to their well-being and abandoned them,
nevertheless, they retained as parts of their oral
tradition the myths that had grown up around the
rites and admired them for their artistic qualities
rather than for their religious usefulness.
11Although origin in ritual has long been the most popular, it is by no means the only theory about how the
theater came into being. Storytelling has been proposed as one alternative. Under this theory, relating and
listening to stories are seen as fundamental human pleasures. Thus, the recalling of an event (a hunt, battle, or
other feat) is elaborated through the narrator 's pantomime and impersonation and eventually through each role
being assumed by a different person.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
To enhance their listeners' enjoyment, storytellers continually make their stories more engaging and memorable.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Anthropologists have developed many theories to help
understand why and how theater originated.
A. The presence of theater in almost all societies is thought to have occurred because early storytellers traveled to
different groups to tell their stories.
B. Many theorists believe that theater arises when societies act out myths to preserve social well-being.
C. The more sophisticated societies became, the better they could influence desirable occurrences through
ritualized theater.
D. Some theories of theater development focus on how theater was used by group leaders to group leaders
govern other members of society.
E. Theater may have come from pleasure humans receive from storytelling and moving rhythmically.
F. The human capacities for imitation and fantasy are considered possible reasons why societies develop theater.
TPO1-3 Timberline Vegetation on Mountains
1.The word “ dramatic ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.gradual
B.complex
C.visible
D.striking
2.Where is the lower timberline mentioned in
paragraph 1 likely to be found?
A.In an area that has little water
B.In an area that has little sunlight
C.Above a transition area
D.On a mountain that has on upper timberline.
3.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 1 about both the upper and lower
timberlines?
A.Both are treeless zones.
B.Both mark forest boundaries.
C.Both are surrounded by desert areas.
D.Both suffer from a lack of moisture.
The transition from forest to treeless tundra on a
mountain slope is often a dramatic one. Within a
vertical distance of just a few tens of meters, trees
disappear as a life-form and are replaced by low
shrubs, herbs, and grasses. This rapid zone of
transition is called the upper timberline or tree line. In
many semiarid areas there is also a lower timberline
where the forest passes into steppe or desert at its
lower edge, usually because of a lack of moisture.
The upper timberline, like the snow line, is highest in
the tropics and lowest in the Polar Regions. It ranges
from sea level in the Polar Regions to 4,500 meters in
the dry subtropics and 3,500-4,500 meters in the
moist tropics. Timberline trees are normally
evergreens, suggesting that these have some
advantage over deciduous trees (those that lose their
leaves) in the extreme environments of the upper
timberline. There are some areas, however, where
broadleaf deciduous trees form the timberline.
Species of birch, for example, may occur at the
timberline in parts of the Himalayas.
4.The word “attain”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.require
B.resist
C.achieve
D.endure
5.According to paragraph 3, which of the following is
true of trees in the middle and upper latitudes?
A.Tree growth is negatively affected by the snow cover
in valleys
B.Tree growth is greater in valleys than on ridges.
C.Tree growth on ridges is not affected by high-velocity
winds.
D.Tree growth lasts longer in those latitudes than it
does in the tropics.
At the upper timberline the trees begin to become
twisted and deformed. This is particularly true for
trees in the middle and upper latitudes, which tend toattain greater heights on ridges, whereas in the
tropics the trees reach their greater heights in the
valleys. This is because middle- and upper- latitude
timberlines are strongly influenced by the duration
and depth of the snow cover. As the snow is deeper
and lasts longer in the valleys, trees tend to attain
greater heights on the ridges, even though they are
more exposed to high-velocity winds and poor, thin
soils there. In the tropics, the valleys appear to be
more favorable because they are less prone to dry out,
they have less frost, and they have deeper soils.
6.Which of the sentences below best express the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? In correct choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Because of their deformed shapes at high altitudes,
trees are not likely to be seriously harmed by the
strong winds typical of those altitudes.
B.As altitude increases, the velocity of winds increase,
leading to a serious decrease in the number of trees
found at high altitudes.
C.The deformed shapes of trees at high altitudes show
that wind velocity, which increase with altitude, can
cause serious hardship for trees.
D.Increased wind velocity at high altitudes deforms
the shapes of trees, and this may cause serious stress
for trees.
7.In paragraph 4, what is the author 's main purpose
in the discussion of the dramatic cessation of tree
growth at the upper timberline?
A.To argue that none of several environment factors
that are believed to contribute to that phenomenon
do in fact play a role in causing it.
B.To argue in support of one particular explanation of
that phenomenon against several competing
explanations
C.To explain why the primary environmental factor
responsible for that phenomenon has not yet been
identified
D.To present several environmental factors that may
contribute to a satisfactory explanation of that
phenomenon
There is still no universally agreed-on explanation for
why there should be such a dramatic cessation of tree
growth at the upper timberline. Various
environmental factors may play a role. Too much snow,
for example, can smother trees, and avalanches and
snow creep can damage or destroy them. Late-lying
snow reduces the effective growing season to the
point where seedlings cannot establish themselves.
Wind velocity also increases with altitude and may
cause serious stress for trees, as is made evident by
the deformed shapes at high altitudes. Some
scientists have proposed that the presence of
increasing levels of ultraviolet light with elevation may
play a role, while browsing and grazing animals like
the ibex may be another contributing factor. Probably
the most important environmental factor is
temperature, for if the growing season is too short
and temperatures are too low, tree shoots and buds
cannot mature sufficiently to survive the winter
months.
8.According to paragraph 6, all of the following
statements are true of plants in the alpine zone
EXCEPT:
A.Because they are low, they are less exposed to
strong winds.
B.Because they are low, the winter snow cover gives
them more protection from the extreme cold.
C.In the equatorial mountains, they tend to be lower
than in mountains elsewhere.
D.Their low growth form keeps them closer to the
ground, where there is more heat than further up
Above the tree line there is a zone that is generally
called alpine tundra. Immediately adjacent to the
timberline, the tundra consists of a fairly complete
cover of low-lying shrubs, herbs, and grasses, while
higher up the number and diversity of species
decrease until there is much bare ground with
occasional mosses and lichens and some prostrate
cushion plants. Some plants can even survive in
favorable microhabitats above the snow line. The
highest plants in the world occur at around 6,100
meters on Makalu in the Himalayas. At this great
height, rocks, warmed by the sun, melt small
snowdrifts.
The most striking characteristic of the plants of the
alpine zone is their low growth form. This enables
them to avoid the worst rigors of high winds and
permits them to make use of the higher temperatures
immediately adjacent to the ground surface. In an
area where low temperatures are limiting to life, the
importance of the additional heat near the surface is
crucial. The low growth form can also permit the
plants to take advantage of the insulation provided by
a winter snow cover. In the equatorial mountains the
low growth form is less prevalent.
16Above the tree line there is a zone that is generally called alpine tundra. Immediately adjacent to the
timberline, the tundra consists of a fairly complete cover of low-lying shrubs, herbs, and grasses, while higher up
the number and diversity of species decrease until there is much bare ground with occasional mosses and lichens
and some prostrate cushion plants. Some plants can even survive in favorable microhabitats above the snow
line. The highest plants in the world occur at around 6,100 meters on Makalu in the Himalayas. At this great
height, rocks, warmed by the sun, melt small snowdrifts. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This explains how, for example, alpine cushion plants have been found growing at an altitude of 6,180 meters.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. At the timberline, whether upper or lower, there is a
profound change in the growth of trees and other plants.
A.Birch is one of the few species of tree that can survive in the extreme environments of the upper timberline.
B.There is no agreement among scientists as to exactly why plant growth is sharply different above and below the
upper timberline.
C.The temperature at the upper timberline is probably more important in preventing tree growth than factors
such as the amount of snowfall or the force of winds.
D.The geographical location of an upper timberline has an impact on both the types of trees found there and their
physical characteristics.
E.High levels of ultraviolet light most likely play a greater role in determining tree growth at the upper timberline
than do grazing animals such as the ibex.
F.Despite being adjacent to the timberline, the alpine tundra is an area where certain kinds of low trees can
endure high winds and very low temperatures.
TPO2
TPO2-1 Desert Formation
The deserts, which already occupy approximately a
fourth of the Earth's land surface, have in recent
decades been increasing at an alarming pace. The
expansion of desertlike conditions into areas where
they did not previously exist is called desertification. It
has been estimated that an additional one-fourth of
the Earth's land surface is threatened by this process.
Desertification is accomplished primarily through the
loss of stabilizing natural vegetation and the
subsequent accelerated erosion of the soil by wind
and water. In some cases the loose soil is blown
completely away, leaving a stony surface. In other
cases, the finer particles may be removed, while the
sand-sized particles are accumulated to form mobile
hills or ridges of sand.
Even in the areas that retain a soil cover, the reduction
of vegetation typically results in the loss of the soil's
ability to absorb substantial quantities of water. The
impact of raindrops on the loose soil tends to transfer
fine clay particles into the tiniest soil spaces, sealing
them and producing a surface that allows very little
water penetration. Water absorption is greatly
reduced; consequently runoff is increased, resulting in
accelerated erosion rates. The gradual drying of the
soil caused by its diminished ability to absorb water
results in the further loss of vegetation, so that a cycle
of progressive surface deterioration is established.
In some regions, the increase in desert areas is
occurring largely as the result of a trend toward drier
climatic conditions. Continued gradual global warming
has produced an increase in aridity for some areas
over the past few thousand years. The process may be
accelerated in subsequent decades if global warming
resulting from air pollution seriously increases.
1.The word delicate in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Fragile
B.Predictable
C.Complex
D.Valuable
2.According to paragraph 5, in dry periods, border
areas have difficulty
A.Adjusting to stresses created by settlement
B.Retaining their fertility after desertification
C.Providing water for irrigating crops
D.Attracting populations in search of food and fuel
3.According to paragraph 6, which of the following is
often associated with raising crops?
A.Lack of proper irrigation techniques
B.Failure to plant crops suited to the particular area
C.Removal of the original vegetation
D.Excessive use of dried animal waste
4.The phrase devoid of in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Consisting of
B.Hidden by
C.Except for
D.Lacking in
There is little doubt, however, that desertification in
most areas results primarily from human activities
rather than natural processes. The semiarid landsbordering the deserts exist in a delicate ecological
balance and are limited in their potential to adjust to
increased environmental pressures. Expanding
populations are subjecting the land to increasing
pressures to provide them with food and fuel. In wet
periods, the land may be able to respond to these
stresses. During the dry periods that are common
phenomena along the desert margins, though, the
pressure on the land is often far in excess of its
diminished capacity, and desertification results.
Four specific activities have been identified as major
contributors to the desertification processes:
overcultivation, overgrazing, firewood gathering, and
overirrigation. The cultivation of crops has expanded
into progressively drier regions as population densities
have grown. These regions are especially likely to have
periods of severe dryness, so that crop failures are
common. Since the raising of most crops necessitates
the prior removal of the natural vegetation, cropfailures leave extensive tracts of land devoid of a plant
cover and susceptible to wind and water erosion.
5.According to paragraph 9, the ground 's absorption
of excess water is a factor in desertification because it
can
A.Interfere with the irrigation of land
B.Limit the evaporation of water
C.Require more absorption of air by the soil
D.Bring salts to the surface
6.All of the following are mentioned in the passage as
contributing to desertification EXCEPT
A.Soil erosion
B.Global warming
C.Insufficient irrigation
D.The raising of livestock
The raising of livestock is a major economic activity in
semiarid lands, where grasses are generally the
dominant type of natural vegetation.
The
consequences of an excessive number of livestock
grazing in an area are the reduction of the vegetation
cover and the trampling and pulverization of the soil.
This is usually followed by the drying of the soil and
accelerated erosion.
Firewood is the chief fuel used for cooking and heating
in many countries. The increased pressures of
expanding populations have led to the removal of
woody plants so that many cities and towns are
surrounded by large areas completely lacking in trees
and shrubs. The increasing use of dried animal waste
as a substitute fuel has also hurt the soil because this
valuable soil conditioner and source of plant nutrients
is no longer being returned to the land.
The final major human cause of desertification is soil
salinization resulting from overirrigation. Excess water
from irrigation sinks down into the water table. If no
drainage system exists, the water table rises, bringing
dissolved salts to the surface. The water evaporates
and the salts are left behind, creating a white crustal
layer that prevents air and water from reaching the
underlying soil.
7.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage?Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Desertification is a significant problem because it is
so hard to reverse and affects large areas of land and
great numbers of people.
B.Slowing down the process of desertification is
difficult because of population growth that has spread
over large areas of land.
C.The spread of deserts is considered a very serious
problem that can be solved only if large numbers of
people in various countries are involved in the effort.
D.Desertification is extremely hard to reverse unless
the population is reduced in the vast areas affected.
8.It can be inferred from the passage that the author
most likely believes which of the following about the
future of desertification?
A.Governments will act quickly to control further
desertification.
B.The factors influencing desertification occur in cycles
and will change in the future.
C.Desertification will continue to increase.
D.Desertification will soon occur in all areas of the
world
The extreme seriousness of desertification results
from the vast areas of land and the tremendous
numbers of people affected, as well as from the great
difficulty of reversing or even slowing the process.
Once the soil has been removed by erosion, only the
passage of centuries or millennia will enable new soil
to form. In areas where considerable soil still remains,
though, a rigorously enforced program of land
protection and cover-crop planting may make it
possible to reverse the present deterioration of the
surface.
21The raising of livestock is a major economic activity in semiarid lands, where grasses are generally the dominant
type of natural vegetation. The consequences of an excessive number of livestock grazing in an area are the
reduction of the vegetation cover and the trampling and pulverization of the soil. This is usually followed by the
drying of the soil and accelerated erosion. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This economic reliance on livestock in certain regions makes large tracts of land susceptible to overgrazing.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Many factors have contributed to the great
increase in desertification in recent decades.
A. Growing human populations and the agricultural demands that come with such growth have upset the
ecological balance in some areas and led to the spread of deserts.
B. As periods of severe dryness have become more common, failures of a number of different crops have
increased.
C. Excessive numbers of cattle and the need for firewood for fuel have reduced grasses and trees, leaving the land
unprotected and vulnerable.
D. Extensive irrigation with poor drainage brings salt to the surface of the soil, a process that reduces water and
air absorption.
E. Animal dung enriches the soil by providing nutrients for plant growth.
F. Grasses are generally the dominant type of natural vegetation in semiarid lands.
TPO2-2 The Origins of Cetaceans
1.In paragraph 1, what does the author say about the
presence of a blowhole in cetaceans?
A.It clearly indicates that cetaceans are mammals.
B.It cannot conceal the fact that cetaceans are
mammals.
C.It is the main difference between cetaceans and
land-dwelling mammals.
D.It cannot yield clues about the origins of cetaceans.
2.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 1 about early sea otters?
A.It is not difficult to imagine what they looked like
B.There were great numbers of them.
C.They lived in the sea only.
D.They did not leave many fossil remains
It should be obvious that cetaceans-whales, porpoises,
and dolphins-are mammals. They breathe through
lungs, not through gills, and give birth to live young.
Their streamlined bodies, the absence of hind legs,
and the presence of a fluke1 and blowhole2 cannot
disguise their affinities with land dwelling
mammals.
However, unlike the cases of sea otters and
pinnipeds (seals, sea lions, and walruses, whose limbs
are functional both on land and at sea), it is not easy
to envision what the first whales looked like. Extinct
but already fully marine cetaceans are known from
the fossil record. How was the gap between a walking
mammal and a swimming whale bridged? Missing
until recently were fossils clearly intermediate, or
transitional, between land mammals and cetaceans.
Very exciting discoveries have finally allowed scientists
to reconstruct the most likely origins of cetaceans. In
1979, a team looking for fossils in northern Pakistan
found what proved to be the oldest fossil whale. The
fossil was officially named Pakicetus in honor of the
country where the discovery was made. Pakicetus was
found embedded in rocks formed from river deposits
that were 52 million years old. The river that formed
these deposits was actually not far from an ancient
ocean known as the Tethys Sea.
3.The word precious in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Exact
B.Scarce
C.Valuable
D.Initial
4.Pakicetus and modern cetaceans have similar
A.Hearing structures
B.Adaptations for diving
C.Skull shapes
D.Breeding locations5.The word exposed in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.Explained
B.Visible
C.Identified
D.Located
6.It can be inferred that Basilosaurus bred and gave
birth in which of the following locations
A.On land
B.Both on land and at sea
C.In shallow water
D.In a marine environment
The fossil consists of a complete skull of an
archaeocyte, an extinct group of ancestors of modern
cetaceans. Although limited to a skull, the Pakicetusfossil provides precious details on the origins of
cetaceans. The skull is cetacean-like but its jawbones
lack the enlarged space that is filled with fat or oil and
used for receiving underwater sound in modern
whales. Pakicetus probably detected sound through
the ear opening as in land mammals. The skull also
lacks a blowhole, another cetacean adaptation for
diving. Other features, however, show experts that
Pakicetus is a transitional form between a group of
extinct flesh- eating mammals, the mesonychids, and
cetaceans. It has been suggested that Pakicetus fed on
fish in shallow water and was not yet adapted for lifein the open ocean. Itprobably bred and gave birth on
land.
Another major discovery was made in Egypt in 1989.
Several skeletons of another early whale, Basilosaurus,
were found in sediments left by the Tethys Sea andnow exposed in the Sahara desert. This whale lived
around 40 million years ago, 12 million years after
Pakicetus. Many incomplete skeletons were found but
they included, for the first time in an archaeocyte, a
complete hind leg that features a foot with three tiny
toes. Such legs would have been far too small to have
supported the 50-foot-long Basilosaurus on land.
Basilosaurus was undoubtedly a fully marine whale
with possibly nonfunctional, or vestigial, hind legs.
7.Why does the author use the word luckily in
mentioning that the Ambulocetus natans fossil
included hind legs?
A.Fossil legs of early whales are a rare find.
B.The legs provided important information about the
evolution of cetaceans.
C.The discovery allowed scientists to reconstruct a
complete skeleton of the whale.
D.Until that time, only the front legs of early whales
had been discovered.
8.The word propulsion in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Staying afloat
B.Changing direction
C.Decreasing weight
D.Moving forward
An even more exciting find was reported in 1994, also
from Pakistan. The now extinct whale Ambulocetus
natans ("the walking whale that swam") lived in the
Tethys Sea 49 million years ago. It lived around 3
million years after Pakicetus but 9 million before
Basilosaurus. The fossil luckily includes a good portion
of the hind legs. The legs were strong and ended in
long feet very much like those of a modern pinniped.
The legs were certainly functional both on land and at
sea. The whale retained a tail and lacked a fluke, the
major means of locomotion in modern cetaceans. The
structure of the backbone shows, however, that
Ambulocetus swam like modern whales by moving the
rear portion of its body up and down, even though a
fluke was missing. The large hind legs were used forpropulsion in water. On land, where it probably bred
and gave birth, Ambulocetus may have moved around
very much like a modern sea lion. It was undoubtedly
a whale that linked life on land with life at sea.
1. Fluke: the two parts that constitute the large
triangular tail of a whale
2. Blowhole: a hole in the top of the head used for
breathing
25It should be obvious that cetaceans-whales, porpoises, and dolphins-are mammals. They breathe through lungs,
not through gills, and give birth to live young. Their streamlined bodies, the absence of hind legs, and the
presence of a fluke1 and blowhole2 cannot disguise their affinities with land dwelling mammals.
However, unlike
the cases of sea otters and pinnipeds (seals, sea lions, and walruses, whose limbs are functional both on land and
at sea), it is not easy to envision what the first whales looked like. Extinct but already fully marine cetaceans are
known from the fossil record. How was the gap between a walking mammal and a swimming whale bridged? 
Missing until recently were fossils clearly intermediate, or transitional, between land mammals and cetaceans.
Very exciting discoveries have finally allowed scientists to reconstruct the most likely origins of cetaceans. In
1979, a team looking for fossils in northern Pakistan found what proved to be the oldest fossil whale. The fossil
was officially named Pakicetus in honor of the country where the discovery was made. Pakicetus was found
embedded in rocks formed from river deposits that were 52 million years old. The river that formed these
deposits was actually not far from an ancient ocean known as the Tethys Sea.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This is a question that has puzzled scientists for ages.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. This passage discusses fossils that help to explain
the likely origins of cetaceans-whales, porpoises, and dolphins.
A. Recent discoveries of fossils have helped to show the link between land mammals and cetaceans.
B. The discovery of Ambulocetus natans provided evidence for a whale that lived both on land and at sea.
C. The skeleton of Basilosaurus was found in what had been the Tethys Sea, an area rich in fossil evidence.
D. Pakicetus is the oldest fossil whale yet to be found.
E. Fossils thought to be transitional forms between walking mammals and swimming whales were found.
F. Ambulocetus' hind legs were used for propulsion in the water.
TPO2-3 Early Cinema
1.According to paragraph 1, all of the following were
true of viewing films in Kinetoscope parlors EXCEPT:
A.One individual at a time viewed a film.
B.Customers could view one film after another.
C.Prizefights were the most popular subjects for films.
D.Each film was short.
The cinema did not emerge as a form of mass
consumption until its technology evolved from the
initial "peepshow" format to the point where images
were projected on a screen in a darkened theater. In
the peepshow format, a film was viewed through a
small opening in a machine that was created for that
purpose. Thomas Edison's peepshow device, the
Kinetoscope, was introduced to the public in 1894. It
was designed for use in Kinetoscope parlors, or
arcades, which contained only a few individual
machines and permitted only one customer to view a
short, 50-foot film at any one time. The first
Kinetoscope parlors contained five machines. For the
price of 25 cents (or 5 cents per machine), customers
moved from machine to machine to watch five
different films (or, in the case of famous prizefights,
successive rounds of a single fight).
2.The author discusses phonograph parlors in
paragraph 2 in order to
A.Explain Edison's financial success
B.Describe the model used to design Kinetoscope
parlors
C.Contrast their popularity to that of Kinetoscope
parlors
D.Illustrate how much more technologically advanced
Kinetoscope parlors were
These Kinetoscope arcades were modeled on
phonograph parlors, which had proven successful for
Edison several years earlier. In the phonograph parlors,
customers listened to recordings through individual
ear tubes, moving from one machine to the next to
hear different recorded speeches or pieces of music.
The Kinetoscope parlors functioned in a similar way.
Edison was more interested in the sale of
Kinetoscopes (for roughly $1,000 apiece) to these
parlors than in the films that would be run in them
(which cost approximately $10 to $15 each). He
refused to develop projection technology, reasoning
that if he made and sold projectors, then exhibitors
would purchase only one machine-a projector-from
him instead of several.
3.The word readily in the passage is closest in meaning
to
A.Frequently
B.Easily
C.Intelligently
D.Obviously
4.According to paragraph 4, how did the early movies
differ from previous spectacles that were presented to
large audiences?
A.They were a more expensive form of entertainment.
B.They were viewed by larger audiences.
C.They were more educational.
D.They did not require live entertainers.
Exhibitors, however, wanted to maximize their profits,
which they could do more readily by projecting a
handful of films to hundreds of customers at a time
(rather than one at a time) and by charging 25 to 50
cents admission. About a year after the opening of the
first Kinetoscope parlor in 1894, showmen such as
Louis and Auguste Lumiere, Thomas Armat and
Charles Francis Jenkins, and Orville and Woodville
Latham (with the assistance of Edison's former
assistant, William Dickson) perfected projection
devices. These early projection devices were used in
vaudeville theaters, legitimate theaters, local town
halls, makeshift storefront theaters, fairgrounds, and
amusement parks to show films to a mass audience.
With the advent of projection in 1895-1896, motion
pictures became the ultimate form of mass
consumption. Previously, large audiences had viewed
spectacles at the theater, where vaudeville, popular
dramas, musical and minstrel shows, classical plays,
lectures, and slide-and-lantern shows had been
presented to several hundred spectators at a time. But
the movies differed significantly from these other
forms of entertainment, which depended on either
live performance or (in the case of the
slide-and-lantern shows) the active involvement of a
master of ceremonies who assembled the final
program.
5.According to paragraph 5, what role did early
exhibitors play in the presentation of movies in
theaters?
A.They decided how to combine various components
of the film program.
B.They advised film-makers on appropriate movie
content.
C.They often took part in the live-action performances.
D.They produced and prerecorded the material that
was shown in the theaters.
6.Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 6
as one of the ways the
Mutoscope differed from the
Kinetoscope?
A.Sound and motion were simultaneously produced in
the Mutoscope.
B.More than one person could view the images at the
same time with the Mutoscope.
C.The Mutoscope was a less sophisticated earlier
prototype of the Kinetoscope.
D.A different type of material was used to produce the
images used in the Mutocope.
7.The word itin the passage refers to
A.The advent of projection
B.The viewer's relationship with the image
C.A similar machine
D.Celluloid
8.According to paragraph 6, the images seen by
viewers in the earlier peepshows, compared to the
images projected on the screen, were relatively
A.Small in size
B.Inexpensive to create
C.Unfocused
D.Limited in subject matter
Although early exhibitors regularly accompanied
movies with live acts, the substance of the movies
themselves is mass-produced, prerecorded material
that can easily be reproduced by theaters with little or
no active participation by the exhibitor. Even though
early exhibitors shaped their film programs by mixing
films and other entertainments together in whichever
way they thought would be most attractive to
audiences or by accompanying them with lectures,
their creative control remained limited. What
audiences came to see was the technological marvel
of the movies; the lifelike reproduction of the
commonplace motion of trains, of waves striking the
shore, and of people walking in the street; and the
magic made possible by trick photography and the
manipulation of the camera.
With the advent of projection, the viewer's
relationship with the image was no longer private, as
it had been with earlier peepshow devices such as the
Kinetoscope and the Mutoscope, which was a similar
machine that reproduced motion by means of
successive images on individual photographic cardsinstead of on strips of celluloid. Itsuddenly became
public-an experience that the viewer shared with
dozens, scores, and even hundreds of others. At the
same time, the image that the spectator looked atexpanded from the minuscule peepshow dimensions
of 1 or 2 inches (in height) to the life-size proportions
of 6 or 9 feet.
30Exhibitors, however, wanted to maximize their profits, which they could do more readily by projecting a handful
of films to hundreds of customers at a time (rather than one at a time) and by charging 25 to 50 cents admission.
About a year after the opening of the first Kinetoscope parlor in 1894, showmen such as Louis and Auguste
Lumiere, Thomas Armat and Charles Francis Jenkins, and Orville and Woodville Latham (with the assistance of
Edison's former assistant, William Dickson) perfected projection devices. These early projection devices were
used in vaudeville theaters, legitimate theaters, local town halls, makeshift storefront theaters, fairgrounds, and
amusement parks to show films to a mass audience. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
When this widespread use of projection technology began to hurt his Kinetoscope business, Edison acquired a
projector developed by Armat and introduced it as "Edison's latest marvel, the Vitascope."
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The technology for modern cinema evolved at the
end of the nineteenth century.
A. Kinetoscope parlors for viewing films were modeled on phonograph parlors.
B. Thomas Edison's design of the Kinetoscope inspired the development of large screen projection.
C. Early cinema allowed individuals to use special machines to view films privately.
D. Slide-and-lantern shows had been presented to audiences of hundreds of spectators.
E. The development of projection technology made it possible to project images on a large screen.
F. Once film images could be projected, the cinema became form of mass consumption.
TPO3
TPO3-1 Architecture
1.The word “feasible”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.in existence
B.without question
C.achievable
D.most likely
Architecture is the art and science of designing
structures that organize and enclose space for
practical and symbolic purposes. Because architecture
grows out of human needs and aspirations, it clearly
communicates cultural values. Of all the visual arts,
architecture affects our lives most directly for it
determines the character of the human environment
in major ways.
Architecture is a three-dimensional form. It utilizes
space, mass, texture, line, light, and color. To be
architecture, a building must achieve a working
harmony with a variety of elements. Humans
instinctively seek structures that will shelter and
enhance their way of life. It is the work of architects to
create buildings that are not simply constructions but
also offer inspiration and delight. Buildings contribute
to human life when they provide shelter, enrich space,
complement their site, suit the climate, and areeconomically feasible . The client who pays for the
building and defines its function is an important
member of the architectural team. The mediocre
design of many contemporary buildings can be traced
to both clients and architects.
2.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Unchanging physical laws have limited the size and
strength of buildings that can be made with materials
discovered long ago.
B.Building materials have changed in order to increase
architectural size and strength, but physical laws of
structure have not changed.
C.When people first started to build, the structural
methods used to provide strength and size were
inadequate because they were not based on physical
laws.
D.Unlike building materials, the methods of support
used in architecture have not changed over time
because they are based on physical laws.
3.The word “devised”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.combined
B.created
C.introduced
D.suggested
In order for the structure to achieve the size and
strength necessary to meet its purpose, architecture
employs methods of support that, because they are
based on physical laws, have changed little since
people first discovered them —even while building
materials have changed dramatically. The world 's
architectural structures have also been devised in
relation to the objective limitations of materials.
Structures can be analyzed in terms of how they deal
with downward forces created by gravity. They are
designed to withstand the forces of compression
(pushing together), tension (pulling apart), bending, or
a combination of these in different parts of the
structure.
4.The word “integral”is closest in meaning to
A.essential
B.variable
C.practical
D.independent
5.In paragraph 4, what does the author imply about
modern buildings?
A.They occupy much less space than buildings
constructed one hundred years ago.
B.They are not very different from the building of a
few generations ago.
C.They weigh less in relation to their size than
buildings constructed one hundred years ago.
D.They take a long time to build as a result of their
complex construction methods.
Even development in architecture has been the result
of major technological changes. Materials and
methods of construction are integral parts of the
design of architecture structures. In earlier times it
was necessary to design structural systems suitable for
the materials that were available, such as wood, stone,
brick. Today technology has progressed to the point
where it is possible to invent new building materials to
suit the type of structure desired. Enormous changes
in materials and techniques of construction within the
last few generations have made it possible to enclose
space with much greater ease and speed and with a
minimum of material. Progress in this area can be
measured by the difference in weight between
buildings built now and those of comparable size built
one hundred years ago.
Modern architectural forms generally have three
separate components comparable to elements of the
human body: a supporting skeleton or frame, an outer
skin enclosing the interior spaces, and equipment,
similar to the body 's vital organs and systems. The
equipment includes plumbing, electrical wiring, hot
water, and air-conditioning. Of course in early
architecture —such as igloos and adobe structures —
there was no such equipment, and the skeleton and
skin were often one.
6.Which of the following correctly characterizes the
relationship between the human body and
architecture that is described in paragraph 5?
A.Complex equipment inside buildings is the one
element in modern architecture that resembles a
component of the human body.
B.The components in early buildings were similar to
three particular elements of the human body.
C.Modern buildings have components that are as
likely to change as the human body is.
D.In general, modern buildings more closely resemble
the human body than earlier buildings do.
7.Why does the author include a description of howthe“doorways and windows ”of Machu Picchu were
constructed?
A.To indicate that the combined skeletons and skins of
the stone buildings of Machu Picchu were similar to
igloos and adobe structures
B.To indicate the different kinds of stones that had to
be cut to build Machu Picchu
C.To provide an illustration of the kind of construction
that was required before arches were invented
D.To explain how ancient builders reduced the amount
of time necessary to construct buildings from stone
8.According to paragraph 6, which of the following
statements is true of the arch?
A.The Romans were the first people to use the stone
arch.
B.The invention of the arch allowed new architectural
forms to be developed.
C.The arch worked by distributing the structural load
of a building toward the center of the arch.
D.The Romans followed earlier practices in their use of
arches.
Much of the world 's great architecture has been
constructed of stone because of its beauty,
permanence, and availability. In the past, whole cities
grew from the arduous task of cutting and piling stone
upon. Some of the world 's finest stone architecture
can be seen in the ruins of the ancient Inca city of
Machu Picchu high in the eastern Andes Mountains of Peru. The doorways and windows are made possible
by placing over the open spaces thick stone beams
that support the weight from above. A structural
invention had to be made before the physical
limitations of stone could be overcome and new
architectural forms could be created. That invention
was the arch, a curved structure originally made of
separate stone or brick segments. The arch was used
by the early cultures of the Mediterranean area chiefly
for underground drains, but it was the Romans who
first developed and used the arch extensively in
aboveground structures. Roman builders perfected
the semicircular arch made of separate blocks of stone.
As a method of spanning space, the arch can support
greater weight than a horizontal beam. It works in
compression to divert the weight above it out to the
sides, where the weight is borne by the vertical
elements on either side of the arch. The arch is among
the many important structural breakthroughs that
have characterized architecture throughout the
centuries.
35Modern architectural forms generally have three separate components comparable to elements of the human
body: a supporting skeleton or frame, an outer skin enclosing the interior spaces, and equipment, similar to the
body's vital organs and systems.  The equipment includes plumbing, electrical wiring, hot water, and
air-conditioning. Of course in early architecture —such as igloos and adobe structures —there was no such
equipment, and the skeleton and skin were often one. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
However, some modern architectural designs, such as those using folded plates of concreter or air-inflated
structures, are again unifying skeleton and skin.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Architecture uses forms and space to express cultural
values.
A. Architects seek to create buildings that are both visually appealing and well suited for human use.
B. Over the course of the history of building, innovations in material and methods of construction have given
architects ever greater freedom to express themselves.
C. Throughout history buildings have been constructed like human bodies, needing distinct “organ”systems in
order to function.
D. Both clients and architects are responsible for the mediocre designs of some modern buildings.
E. Modern buildings tend to lack the beauty of ancient stone buildings such as those of Machu Picchu.
F. The discovery and use of the arch typifies the way in which architecture advances by developing more efficient
types of structures.
TPO3-2 Depletion of the Ogallala Aquifer
1.According to paragraph 1, which of the following
statements about the High Plains is true?
A.Until farmers and ranchers settled there in the
1880s, the High Plains had never been inhabited.
B.The climate of the High Plains is characterized by
higher-than-average temperatures.
C.The large aquifer that lies underneath the High
Plains was discovered by the Ogallala Sioux Indians.
D.Before the early 1900's there was only a small
amount of farming and ranching in the High Plains.
2.According to paragraph 2, all of the following
statements about the Ogallala aquifer are true
EXCEPT:
A.The aquifer stretches from South Dakota to Texas.
B.The aquifer 's water comes from underground
springs.
C.Water has been gathering in the aquifer for 30,000
years.
D.The aquifer 's water is stored in a layer of sandstone.
3.The word “ensuing”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.continuing
B.surprising
C.initial
D.subsequent
The vast grasslands of the High Plains in the central
United States were settled by farmers and ranchers in
the 1880s. This region has a semiarid climate, and for
50 years after its settlement, it supported a
low-intensity agricultural economy of cattle ranching
and wheat farming. In the early twentieth century,
however, it was discovered that much of the High
Plains was underlain by a huge aquifer (a rock layer
containing large quantities of groundwater). This
aquifer was named the Ogallala aquifer after the
Ogallala Sioux Indians, who once inhabited the region.
The Ogallala aquifer is a sandstone formation that
underlies some 583,000 square kilometers of land
extending from northwestern Texas to southern South
Dakota. Water from rains and melting snows has been
accumulating in the Ogallala for the past 30,000 years.
Estimates indicate that the aquifer contains enough
water to fill Lake Huron, but unfortunately, under the
semiarid climatic conditions that presently exist in the
region, rates of addition to the aquifer are minimal,
amounting to about half a centimeter a year.
The first wells were drilled into the Ogallala during thedrought years of the early 1930s. The ensuing rapid
expansion of irrigation agriculture, especially from the
1950s onward, transformed the economy of the
region. More than 100,000 wells now tap the Ogallala.
Modern irrigation devices, each capable of spraying
4.5 million liters of water a day, have produced a
landscape dominated by geometric patterns of circular
green islands of crops. Ogallala water has enabled the
High Plains region to supply significant amounts of the
cotton, sorghum, wheat, and corn grown in the United
States. In addition, 40 percent of American grain-fed
beef cattle are fattened here.
374The word “unprecedented ” in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.difficult to control
B.without any restriction
C.unlike anything in the past
D.rapidly expanding5.The word “virtually”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.clearly
B.perhaps
C.frequently
D.almost
6According to paragraph 4, all of following are
consequences of the heavy use of the Ogallala aquifer
for irrigation EXCEPT:
A.The recharge rate of the aquifer is decreasing.
B.Water tables in the region are becoming increasingly
lower.
C.Wells now have to be dug to much greater depths
than before.
D.Increasingly powerful pumps are needed to draw
water from the aquifer
This unprecedented development of a finite
groundwater resource with an almost negligible
natural recharge rate —that is, virtually no natural
water source to replenish the water supply —has
caused water tables in the region to fall drastically. In
the 1930s, wells encountered plentiful water at a
depth of about 15 meters; currently, they must be dug
to depths of 45 to 60 meters or more. In places, the
water table is declining at a rate of a meter a year,
necessitating the periodic deepening of wells and the
use of ever-more-powerful pumps. It is estimated that
at current withdrawal rates, much of the aquifer will
run dry within 40 years. The situation is most critical in
Texas, where the climate is driest, the greatest amount
of water is being pumped, and the aquifer contains
the least water. It is projected that the remaining
Ogallala water will, by the year 2030, support only 35
to 40 percent of the irrigated acreage in Texas that is
supported in 1980.
7.Paragraph 5 mentions which of the following as a
source of difficulty for some farmers who try to
conserve water?
A.Crops that do not need much water are difficult to
grow in the High Plains.
B.Farmers who grow crops that need a lot of water
make higher profits.
C.Irrigating less frequently often leads to crop failure.
D.Few farmers are convinced that the aquifer will
eventually run dry.
8.According to paragraph 6, what is the main
disadvantage of the proposed plans to transport river
water to the High Plains?
A.The rivers cannot supply sufficient water for the
farmer's needs.
B.Increased irrigation costs would make the products
too expensive.
C.The costs of using capillary water for irrigation will
increase.
D.Farmers will be forced to switch to genetically
engineered crops.
The reaction of farmers to the inevitable depletion of
the Ogallala varies. Many have been attempting to
conserve water by irrigating less frequently or by
switching to crops that require less water. Others,
however, have adopted the philosophy that it is best
to use the water while it is still economically profitable
to do so and to concentrate on high-value crops such
as cotton. The incentive of the farmers who wish to
conserve water is reduced by their knowledge that
many of their neighbors are profiting by using great
amounts of water, and in the process are drawing
down the entire region 's water supplies.
In the face of the upcoming water supply crisis, a
number of grandiose schemes have been developed
to transport vast quantities of water by canal or
pipeline from the Mississippi, the Missouri, or the
Arkansas rivers. Unfortunately, the cost of water
obtained through any of these schemes would
increase pumping costs at least tenfold, making the
cost of irrigated agricultural products from the region
uncompetitive on the national and international
markets. Somewhat more promising have been recent
experiments for releasing capillary water (water in the
soil) above the water table by injecting compressed air
into the ground. Even if this process proves successful,
however, it would almost triple water costs. Genetic
engineering also may provide a partial solution, as
new strains of drought-resistant crops continue to be
developed. Whatever the final answer to the water
crisis may be, it is evident that within the High Plains,
irrigation water will never again be the abundant,
inexpensive resource it was during the agricultural
boom years of the mid-twentieth century.
39The reaction of farmers to the inevitable depletion of the Ogallala varies. Many have been attempting to conserve
water by irrigating less frequently or by switching to crops that require less water. Others, however, have
adopted the philosophy that it is best to use the water while it is still economically profitable to do so and to
concentrate on high-value crops such as cotton. The incentive of the farmers who wish to conserve water is
reduced by their knowledge that many of their neighbors are profiting by using great amounts of water, and in the
process are drawing down the entire region 's water supplies. 
In the face of the upcoming water supply crisis, a number of grandiose schemes have been developed to transport
vast quantities of water by canal or pipeline from the Mississippi, the Missouri, or the Arkansas rivers. 
Unfortunately, the cost of water obtained through any of these schemes would increase pumping costs at least
tenfold, making the cost of irrigated agricultural products from the region uncompetitive on the national and
international markets. Somewhat more promising have been recent experiments for releasing capillary water
(water in the soil) above the water table by injecting compressed air into the ground. Even if this process proves
successful, however, it would almost triple water costs. Genetic engineering also may provide a partial solution, as
new strains of drought-resistant crops continue to be developed. Whatever the final answer to the water crisis
may be, it is evident that within the High Plains, irrigation water will never again be the abundant, inexpensive
resource it was during the agricultural boom years of the mid-twentieth century.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
But even if uncooperative farmers were to join in the conservation efforts, this would only delay the depletion of
the aquifer.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The Ogallala aquifer is a large underground source of
water in the High Plains region of the United States.
A. The use of the Ogallala for irrigation has allowed the High Plains to become one of the most productive
agricultural regions in the United States.
B. Given the aquifer 's low recharge rate, its use for irrigation is causing water tables to drop and will eventually
lead to its depletion.
C. Releasing capillary water and introducing drought-resistant crops are less-promising solutions to the water
supply crisis than bringing in river water
D. The periodic deepening of wells and the use of more-powerful pumps would help increase the natural recharge
rate of the Ogallala.
E. In Texas, a great deal of attention is being paid to genetic engineering because it is there that the most critical
situation exists.
F. Several solutions to the upcoming water supply crisis have been proposed, but none of them promises to keep
the costs of irrigation low.
TPO3-3 The Long Term Stability of Ecosystems
1.According to paragraph 1, which of the following is
NOT true of climax communities?
A.They occur at the end of a succession.
B.They last longer than any other type of community.
C.The numbers of plants in them and the mix of
species do not change.
D.They remain stable for at least 500 years at a time.
2.According to paragraph 2, which of the following
principles of ecosystems can be learned by studying a
pond?
A.Ecosystem properties change more slowly than
individuals in the system.
B.The stability of an ecosystem tends to change as
individuals are replaced.
C.Individual organisms are stable from one year to the
next.
D.A change in the members of an organism does not
affect an ecosystem 's properties
Plant communities assemble themselves flexibly, and
their particular structure depends on the specific
history of the area. Ecologists use the term
“succession” to refer to the changes that happen in
plant communities and ecosystems over time. The first
community in a succession is called a pioneer
community, while the long-lived community at the
end of succession is called a climax community.
Pioneer and successional plant communities are said
to change over periods from 1 to 500 years. These
changes—in plant numbers and the mix of
species—are cumulative. Climax communities
themselves change but over periods of time greater
than about 500 years.
An ecologist who studies a pond today may well find it
relatively unchanged in a year's time. Individual fish
may be replaced, but the number of fish will tend to
be the same from one year to the next. We can say
that the properties of an ecosystem are more stable
than the individual organisms that compose the
ecosystem.
3.According to paragraph 4, why is the question of
ecosystem stability complicated? A.The reasons for
ecosystem change are not always clear.
B.Ecologists often confuse the word “stability”with
the word “resilience. ”
C.The exact meaning of the word “stability” is
debated by ecologists.
D.There are many different answers to ecological
questions.
4.According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
true of climax communities?
A.They are more resilient than pioneer communities.
B.They can be considered both the most and the least
stable communities.
C.They are stable because they recover quickly after
major disturbances.
D.They are the most resilient communities because
they change the least over time.
At one time, ecologists believed that species diversity
made ecosystems stable. They believed that the
greater the diversity the more stable the ecosystem.
Support for this idea came from the observation that
long-lasting climax communities usually have more
complex food webs and more species diversity than
pioneer communities. Ecologists concluded that the
apparent stability of climax ecosystems depended on
their complexity. To take an extreme example,
farmlands dominated by a single crop are so unstable
that one year of bad weather or the invasion of a
single pest can destroy the entire crop. In contrast, a
complex climax community, such as a temperate
forest, will tolerate considerable damage from
weather to pests.
The question of ecosystem stability is complicated,
however. The first problem is that ecologists do not all
agree what “stability” means. Stability can be
defined as simply lack of change. In that case, the
climax community would be considered the most
stable, since, by definition, it changes the least over
time. Alternatively, stability can be defined as the
speed with which an ecosystem returns to a particular
form following a major disturbance, such as a fire. This
kind of stability is also called resilience. In that case,
climax communities would be the most fragile and the
least stable, since they can require hundreds of years
to return to the climax state.
5.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 5 about redwood forests?
A.They become less stable as they mature.
B.They support many species when they reach climax.
C.They are found in temperate zones.
D.They have reduced diversity during mid-successional
stages.
9.In paragraph 5, why does the author provide theinformation that “A fifteen-speed racing bicycle is
more likely to break down than a child 's tricycle”?
A.To illustrate a general principle about the stability of
systems by using an everyday example
B.To demonstrate that an understanding of stability in
ecosystems can be applied to help understand stability
in other situations
C.To make a comparison that supports the claim that,
in general, stability increases with diversity
D.To provide an example that contradicts
mathematical models of ecosystems
Even the kind of stability defined as simple lack of
change is not always associated with maximum
diversity. At least in temperate zones, maximum
diversity is often found in mid-successional stages, not
in the climax community. Once a redwood forest
matures, for example, the kinds of species and the
number of individuals growing on the forest floor are
reduced. In general, diversity, by itself, does not
ensure stability. Mathematical models of ecosystemslikewise suggest that diversity does not guarantee
ecosystem stability —just the opposite, in fact. A more
complicated system is, in general, more likely than a
simple system to break down. A fifteen-speed racing
bicycle is more likely to break down than a child 's
tricycle.
7.The word “pales”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.increases proportionally
B.differs
C.loses significance
D.is common
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incurred choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Ecologists now think that the stability of an
environment is a result of diversity rather than
patchiness.
B.Patchy environments that vary from place to place
do not often have high species diversity.
C.Uniform environments cannot be climax
communities because they do not support as many
types of organisms as patchy environments.
D.A patchy environment is thought to increase
stability because it is able to support a wide variety of
organisms.
Ecologists are especially interested to know what
factors contribute to the resilience of communities
because climax communities all over the world are
being severely damaged or destroyed by human
activities. The destruction caused by the volcanic
explosion of Mount St. Helens, in the northwestern United States, for example, pales in comparison to the
destruction caused by humans. We need to know
what aspects of a community are most important to
the community 's resistance to destruction, as well as
its recovery.
Many ecologists now think that the relative
long-term stability of climax communities comes not
from diversity but from the “patchiness ”of the
environment, an environment that varies from place
to place supports more kinds of organisms than an
environment that is uniform. A local population that
goes extinct is quickly replaced by immigrants from an
adjacent community. Even if the new population is of
a different species, it can approximately fill the niche
vacated by the extinct population and keep the food
web intact.
44Ecologists are especially interested to know what factors contribute to the resilience of communities because
climax communities all over the world are being severely damaged or destroyed by human activities. The
destruction caused by the volcanic explosion of Mount St. Helens, in the northwestern United States, for example,
pales in comparison to the destruction caused by humans. We need to know what aspects of a community are
most important to the community 's resistance to destruction, as well as its recovery. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
In fact, damage to the environment by humans is often much more severe than damage by natural events and
processes.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The process of succession and the stability of a climax
community can change over time.
A. The changes that occur in an ecosystem from the pioneer to the climax community can be seen in one human
generation.
B. A high degree of species diversity does not always result in a stable ecosystem.
C. Disagreements over the meaning of the term "stability" make it difficult to identify the most stable ecosystems.
D. Ecologists agree that climax communities are the most stable types of ecosystems.
E. The level of resilience in a plant community contributes to its long-term stability.
F. The resilience of climax communities makes them resistant to destruction caused by humans.
TPO4
TPO4-1 Deer Populations of the Puget Sound
1.It can be inferred from the discussion in paragraph 2
that winter conditions
A.cause some deer to hibernate
B.make food unavailable in the highlands for deer
C.make it easier for deer to locate understory plants
D.prevent deer from migrating during the winter2.The word " inhibits " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.consists of
B.combines
C.restricts
D.establishes
Two species of deer have been prevalent in the Puget
Sound area of Washington State in the Pacific
Northwest of the United States. The black-tailed deer,
a lowland, west-side cousin of the mule deer of
eastern Washington, is now the most common. The
other species, the Columbian white-tailed deer, in
earlier times was common in the open prairie country;
it is now restricted to the low, marshy islands and
flood plains along the lower Columbia River.
Nearly any kind of plant of the forest understory canbe part of a deer's diet. Where the forest inhibits the
growth of grass and other meadow plants, the
black-tailed deer browses on huckleberry, salal,
dogwood, and almost any other shrub or herb. But
this is fair-weather feeding. What keeps the
black-tailed deer alive in the harsher seasons of plant
decay and dormancy? One compensation for not
hibernating is the built-in urge to migrate. Deer may
move from high-elevation browse areas in summer
down to the lowland areas in late fall. Even with snow
on the ground, the high bushy understory is exposed;
also snow and wind bring down leafy branches of
cedar, hemlock, red alder, and other arboreal fodder.
3.The phrase " in the same breath " in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.impatiently
B.humorously
C.continuously
D.immediately
4.The author tells the story of the explorers Lewis and
Clark in paragraph 3 in order to illustrate which of the
following points?
A.The number of deer within the Puget Sound region
has varied over time.
B.Most of the explorers who came to the Puget Sound
area were primarily interested in hunting game.
C.There was more game for hunting in the East of the
United States than in the West.
D.Individual explorers were not as successful at
locating games as were the trading companies.
5.According to paragraph 3, how had Fort Vancouver
changed by the time David Douglas returned in 1832?
A.The fort had become the headquarters for the
Hudson's Bay Company.
B.Deer had begun populating the meadows around
the fort.
C.Deer populations near the fort had been destroyed.
D.Crop yields in the area around the fort had
decreased.
The numbers of deer have fluctuated markedly since
the entry of Europeans into Puget Sound country. The
early explorers and settlers told of abundant deer inthe early 1800s and yet almost in the same breath
bemoaned the lack of this succulent game animal.
Famous explorers of the north American frontier,
Lewis and Clark arrived at the mouth of the Columbia
River on November 14, 1805, in nearly starved
circumstances. They had experienced great difficulty
finding game west of the Rockies and not until the
second of December did they kill their first elk. To
keep 40 people alive that winter, they consumed
approximately 150 elk and 20 deer. And when game
moved out of the lowlands in early spring, the
expedition decided to return east rather than face
possible starvation. Later on in the early years of the
nineteenth century, when Fort Vancouver became the
headquarters of the Hudson's Bay Company, deer
populations continued to fluctuate. David Douglas,
Scottish botanical explorer of the 1830s, found a
disturbing change in the animal life around the fort
during the period between his first visit in 1825 and
his final contact with the fort in 1832. A recent
Douglas biographer states:" The deer which once
picturesquely dotted the meadows around the fort
were gone , hunted to extermination in order to
protect the crops."
6.Why does the author ask readers to recall “the fate
of the Columbian white-tailed deer ” in the
discussion of changes in the wilderness landscape?
A.To provide support for the idea that habitat
destruction would lead to population decline
B.To compare how two species of deer caused biotic
changes in the wilderness environment
C.To provide an example of a species of deer that has
successfully adapted to human settlement
D.To argue that some deer species must be given a
protected status
7.Which of the following statements about deer
populations is supported by the information in
paragraph 4?
A.Deer populations reached their highest point during
the 1940s and then began to decline.
B.The activities of settlers contributed in unexpected
ways to the growth of some deer populations in later
times.
C.The cleaning of wilderness land for construction
caused biotic changes from which the black-tailed
deer population has never recovered.
D.Since the 1940s the winter populations of deer have
fluctuated more than the summer populations have.
Reduction in numbers of game should have boded ill
for their survival in later times. A worsening of the
plight of deer was to be expected as settlers
encroached on the land, logging, burning, and clearing,
eventually replacing a wilderness landscape with
roads, cities, towns, and factories. No doubt thenumbers of deer declined still further. Recall the fate
of the Columbian white-tailed deer , now in a
protected status. But for the black-tailed deer, human
pressure has had just the opposite effect. Wildlife
zoologist Helmut Buechner(1953), in reviewing the
nature of biotic changes in Washington through
recorded time, says that "since the early 1940s, the
state has had more deer than at any other time in its
history, the winter population fluctuating around
approximately 320,000 deer (mule and black-tailed
deer), which will yield about 65,000 of either sex and
any age annually for an indefinite period."
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Arthur Einarsen 's longtime family with the Pacific
Northwest helped him discover areas where deer had
an increase in suitable browse.
B.Arthur Einarsen found that deforested feeding
grounds provided deer with more and better food.
C.Biologist like Einarsen believe it is important to find
additional open areas with suitable browse for deer to
inhabit.
D.According to Einarsen, huckleberry and vine maple
are examples of vegetation that may someday
improve the nutrition of deer in the open areas of the
Pacific Northwest.
The causes of this population rebound are
consequences of other human actions. First, the major
predators of deer —wolves, cougar, and lynx —have
been greatly reduced in numbers. Second,
conservation has been insured by limiting times for
and types of hunting. But the most profound reason
for the restoration of high population numbers has
been the fate of the forests. Great tracts of lowland
country deforested by logging, fire, or both havebecome ideal feeding grounds of deer. In addition to
finding an increase of suitable browse, like
huckleberry and vine maple, Arthur Einarsen,
longtime game biologist in the Pacific Northwest,
found quality of browse in the open areas to be
substantially more nutritive. The protein content of
shade-grown vegetation, for example, was much lower
than that for plants grown in clearings.
Nearly any kind of plant of the forest understory can be part of a deer's diet. Where the forest inhibits the growth
of grass and other meadow plants, the black-tailed deer browses on huckleberry, salal, dogwood, and almost any
other shrub or herb. But this is fair-weather feeding. What keeps the black-tailed deer alive in the harsher seasons
of plant decay and dormancy? One compensation for not hibernating is the built-in urge to migrate. Deer may
move from high-elevation browse areas in summer down to the lowland areas in late fall. Even with snow on
the ground, the high bushy understory is exposed; also snow and wind bring down leafy branches of cedar,
hemlock, red alder, and other arboreal fodder.
The numbers of deer have fluctuated markedly since the entry of Europeans into Puget Sound country. The
early explorers and settlers told of abundant deer in the early 1800s and yet almost in the same breath bemoaned
the lack of this succulent game animal. Famous explorers of the north American frontier, Lewis and Clark arrived at
the mouth of the Columbia River on November 14, 1805, in nearly starved circumstances. They had experienced
great difficulty finding game west of the Rockies and not until the second of December did they kill their first elk.
To keep 40 people alive that winter, they consumed approximately 150 elk and 20 deer. And when game moved
out of the lowlands in early spring, the expedition decided to return east rather than face possible starvation.
Later on in the early years of the nineteenth century, when Fort Vancouver became the headquarters of the
Hudson's Bay Company, deer populations continued to fluctuate. David Douglas, Scottish botanical explorer of the
1830s, found a disturbing change in the animal life around the fort during the period between his first visit in 1825
and his final contact with the fort in 1832. A recent Douglas biographer states:" The deer which once
picturesquely dotted the meadows around the fort were gone , hunted to extermination in order to protect the
crops."
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
There food is available and accessible throughout the winter.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Deer in the Puget Sound area eat a wide variety of foods and migrate
seasonally to find food.
A. The balance of deer species in the Puget Sound region has changed over time, with the Columbian white-tailed
deer now outnumbering other types of deer.
B. Deer populations naturally fluctuate, but early settlers in the Puget Sound environment caused an overall
decline in the deer populations of the areas at that time.
C. In the long term, black-tailed deer in the Puget Sound area have benefitted from human activities through the
elimination of their natural predators, and more and better food in deforested areas.
D. Because Puget Sound deer migrate, it was and still remains difficult to determine accurately how many deer are
living at any one time in the western United States.
E. Although it was believed that human settlement of the American West would cause the total number of deer to
decrease permanently, the opposite has occurred for certain types of deer.
F. Wildlife biologists have long been concerned that the loss of forests may create nutritional deficiencies for deer.
TPO4-2 Cave Art in Europe
1.The word “marked”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.considerable
B.surprising
C.limited
D.adequate
2.Paragraph 1 supports which of the following
statements about painting in Europe?
A.It is much older than painting in Australia.
BIt is as much as 28,000 years old.
C.It is not as old as painting in southern Africa.
D.It is much more than 30,000 years old.
The earliest discovered traces of art are beads and
carvings, and then paintings, from sites dating back to
the Upper Paleolithic period. We might expect that
early artistic efforts would be crude, but the cave
paintings of Spain and southern France show amarked degree of skill. So do the naturalistic paintings
on slabs of stone excavated in southern Africa. Some
of those slabs appear to have been painted as much as
28,000 years ago, which suggests that painting in
Africa is as old as painting in Europe. But painting may
be even older than that. The early Australians may
have painted on the walls of rock shelters and cliff
faces at least 30,000 years ago, and maybe as much as
60,000 years ago.
The researchers Peter Ucko and Andree Rosenfeld
identified three principal locations of paintings in the
caves of western Europe: (1) in obviously inhabited
rock shelters and cave entrances; (2) in galleries
immediately off the inhabited areas of caves; and (3)
in the inner reaches of caves, whose difficulty of
access has been interpreted by some as a sign that
magical-religious activities were performed there.
3.The word “trappings ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.conditions
B.problems
C.influences
D.decorations
4.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Upper Paleolithic people, like many contemporary
peoples, believed that if they drew a human image in
their cave art, it would cause death or injury.
B.Many contemporary people believe that the
drawing of a human image can cause death or injury,
so they, like Upper Paleolithic people, rarely depicted
human figures in their cave art.
C.If Upper Paleolithic people, like many contemporary
peoples, believed that the drawing of a human image
could cause death or injury, this belief might explain
why human figures are rarely depicted in cave art.
D.Although many contemporary peoples believe that
the drawing of a human image can cause death or
injury, researchers cannot explain why Upper
Paleolithic people rarely depicted human figures in
their cave art.
5.According to paragraph 3, scholars explained chips
in the painted figures of animals by proposing that
A.Upper Paleolithic artists used marks to record the
animals they had seen
B.the paintings were inspired by the need to increase
the supply of animals for hunting
C.the artists had removed rough spots on the cave
walls
D.Upper Paleolithic people used the paintings to
increase their luck at hunting
The subjects of the paintings are mostly animals. The
paintings rest on bare walls, with no backdrops or
environmental trappings .
Perhaps, like many
contemporary peoples, Upper Paleolithic men and
women believed that the drawing of a human image
could cause death or injury, and if that were indeed
their belief, it might explain why human figures are
rarely depicted in cave art. Another explanation for
the focus on animals might be that these people
sought to improve their luck at hunting. This theory is
suggested by evidence of chips in the painted figures,
perhaps made by spears thrown at the drawings. But if
improving their hunting luck was the chief motivation
for the paintings, it is difficult to explain why only a
few show signs of having been speared. Perhaps the
paintings were inspired by the need to increase thesupply of animals. Cave art seems to have reached a
peak toward the end of the Upper Paleolithic period,
when the herds of game were decreasing .
6.Why does the author mention that Upper Paleolithic
cave art seemed to have “reached a peak toward the
end of the Upper Paleolithic period, when the herds
of game were decreasing ”?
A.To argue that Upper Paleolithic art ceased to include
animals when herds of game became scarce
B.To provide support for the idea that the aim of the
paintings was to increase the supply of animals for
hunting
C.To emphasize the continued improvement in the
quality of cave art throughout the Upper Paleolithic
period
D.To show the direct connection between the
decrease in herds of game and the end of the Upper
Paleolithic period
7.According to paragraph 4, which of the following
may best represent the attitude of hunters toward
deer and reindeer in the Upper Paleolithic period?
A.Hunters did not fear deer and reindeers as much as
they did large game animals such as horses and
mammoths.
B.Hunters were not interested in hunting deer and
reindeer because of their size and speed.
C.Hunters preferred the meat and hides of deer and
reindeer to those of other animals.
D.Hunters avoided deer and reindeer because of their
natural weapons, such as horns.
The particular symbolic significance of the cave
paintings in southwestern France is more explicitly
revealed, perhaps, by the results of a study conducted
by researchers Patricia Rice and Ann Paterson. The
data they present suggest that the animals portrayed
in the cave paintings were mostly the ones that the
painters preferred for meat and for materials such as
hides. For example, wild cattle (bovines) and horses
are portrayed more often than we would expect by
chance, probably because they were larger and
heavier (meatier) than other animals in the
environment. In addition, the paintings mostly portray
animals that the painters may have feared the most
because of their size, speed, natural weapons such as
tusks and horns, and the unpredictability of their
behavior. That is, mammoths, bovines, and horses are
portrayed more often than deer and reindeer. Thus,
the paintings are consistent with the idea that the art
is related to the importance of hunting in the
economy of Upper Paleolithic people. Consistent with
this idea, according to the investigators, is the fact that
the art of the cultural period that followed the Upper
Paleolithic also seems to reflect how people got their
food. But in that period, when getting food no longer
depended on hunting large game animals (because
they were becoming extinct), the art ceased to focus
on portrayals of animals.
8.According to paragraph 4, what change is evident in
the art of the period following the Upper Paleolithic?
A.This new art starts to depict small animals rather
than large ones.
B.This new art ceases to reflect the ways in which
people obtained their food.
C.This new art no longer consists mostly of
representations of animals.
D.This new art begins to show the importance of
hunting to the economy.
Upper Paleolithic art was not confined to cave
paintings. Many shafts of spears and similar objects
were decorated with figures of animals. The
anthropologist Alexander Marshack has an interesting
interpretation of some of the engravings made during
the Upper Paleolithic. He believes that as far back as
30,000 B.C., hunters may have used a system of
notation, engraved on bone and stone, to mark phases
of the Moon. If this is true, it would mean that Upper
Paleolithic people were capable of complex thought
and were consciously aware of their environment. In
addition to other artworks, figurines representing the
human female in exaggerated form have also been
found at Upper Paleolithic sites. It has been suggested
that these figurines were an ideal type or an
expression of a desire for fertility.
54The subjects of the paintings are mostly animals. The paintings rest on bare walls, with no backdrops or
environmental trappings .
Perhaps, like many contemporary peoples, Upper Paleolithic men and women
believed that the drawing of a human image could cause death or injury, and if that were indeed their belief, it
might explain why human figures are rarely depicted in cave art. Another explanation for the focus on animals
might be that these people sought to improve their luck at hunting. This theory is suggested by evidence of
chips in the painted figures, perhaps made by spears thrown at the drawings. But if improving their hunting luck
was the chief motivation for the paintings, it is difficult to explain why only a few show signs of having been
speared. Perhaps the paintings were inspired by the need to increase the supply of animals. Cave art seems to
have reached a peak toward the end of the Upper Paleolithic period, when the herds of game were decreasing .

9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
Therefore, if the paintings were connected with hunting, some other explanation is needed.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that explain the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Upper Paleolithic cave paintings in Western Europe are
among humanity 's earliest artistic efforts.
A. Researchers have proposed several different explanations for the fact that animals were the most common
subjects in the cave paintings.
B. The art of the cultural period that followed the Upper Paleolithic ceased to portray large game animals and
focused instead on the kinds of animals that people of that period preferred to hunt.
C. Some researchers believe that the paintings found in France provide more explicit evidence of their symbolic
significance than those found in Spain, southern Africa, and Australia.
D. The cave paintings focus on portraying animals without also depicting the natural environments in which these
animals are typically found.
E. Some researchers have argued that the cave paintings mostly portrayed large animals that provided Upper
Paleolithic people with meat and materials.
F. Besides cave paintings, Upper Paleolithic people produced several other kinds of artwork, one of which has
been thought to provide evidence of complex thought.
TPO4-3 Petroleum Resources
1.The word “accumulate ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.grow up
B.build up
C.spread out
D.break apart
2.According to paragraph 1, which of the following is
true about petroleum formation?
A.Microscopic organisms that live in mud produce
crude oil and natural gas.
B.Large amounts of oxygen are needed for petroleum
formation to begin.
C.Petroleum is produced when organic material in
sediments combines with decaying marine organisms.
D.Petroleum formation appears to begin in marine
sediments where organic matter is present.
3.In paragraphs 1 and 2, the author 's primary purpose
is to
A.describe how petroleum is formed
B.explain why petroleum formation is a slow process
C.provide evidence that a marine environment is
necessary for petroleum formation
D.show that oil commonly occurs in association with
gas
4.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Higher temperatures and pressures promote
sedimentation, which is responsible for petroleum
formation.
B.Deposits of sediments on top of organic matter
increase the temperature of and pressure on the
matter.
C.Increase pressure and heat from the weight of the
sediment turn the organic remains into petroleum.
D.The remains of microscopic organisms transform
into petroleum once they are buried under mud.
Petroleum, consisting of crude oil and natural gas,
seems to originate from organic matter in marine
sediment. Microscopic organisms settle to the seafloorand accumulate in marine mud. The organic matter
may partially decompose, using up the dissolved
oxygen in the sediment. As soon as the oxygen is gone,
decay stops and the remaining organic matter is
preserved.
Continued sedimentation—the process of deposits'
settling on the sea bottom—buries the organic
matter and subjects it to higher temperatures and
pressures, which convert the organic matter to oil
and gas. As muddy sediments are pressed together,
the gas and small droplets of oil may be squeezed out
of the mud and may move into sandy layers nearby.
Over long periods of time (millions of years),
accumulations of gas and oil can collect in the sandy
layers. Both oil and gas are less dense than water, so
they generally tend to rise upward through
water-saturated rock and sediment.
5.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 3 about gushers?
A.They make bringing the oil to the surface easier.
B.They signal the presence of huge oil reserves.
C.They waste more oil than they collect.
D.They are unlikely to occur nowadays.
6.Which of the following strategies for oil exploration
is described in paragraph 4?
A.Drilling under the ocean 's surface
B.Limiting drilling to accessible locations
C.Using highly sophisticated drilling equipment
D.Constructing technologically advanced drilling
platforms
7.What does the development of the Alaskan oil field
mentioned in paragraph 4 demonstrate?
A.More oil is extracted from the sea than from land.
B.Drilling for oil requires major financial investments.
C.The global demand for oil has increased over the
years.
D.The North Slope of Alaska has substantial amounts
of oil.
Oil pools are valuable underground accumulations of
oil, and oil fields are regions underlain by one or more
oil pools. When an oil pool or field has been
discovered, wells are drilled into the ground.
Permanent towers, called derricks, used to be built to
handle the long sections of drilling pipe. Now portable
drilling machines are set up and are then dismantled
and removed. When the well reaches a pool, oil
usually rises up the well because of its density
difference with water beneath it or because of the
pressure of expanding gas trapped above it. Although
this rise of oil is almost always carefully controlled
today, spouts of oil, or gushers, were common in the
past. Gas pressure gradually dies out, and oil is
pumped from the well. Water or steam may be
pumped down adjacent wells to help push the oil out.
At a refinery, the crude oil from underground is
separated into natural gas, gasoline, kerosene, and
various oils. Petrochemicals such as dyes, fertilizer,
and plastic are also manufactured from the
petroleum.
As oil becomes increasingly difficult to find, the search
for it is extended into more-hostile environments. The
development of the oil field on the North Slope of
Alaska and the construction of the Alaska pipeline are
examples of the great expense and difficulty involved
in new oil discoveries. Offshore drilling platforms
extend the search for oil to the ocean 's continental
shelves—those gently sloping submarine regions at
the edges of the continents. More than one-quarter of
the world 's oil and almost one-fifth of the world 's
natural gas come from offshore, even though offshore
drilling is six to seven times more expensive than
drilling on land. A significant part of this oil and gas
comes from under the North Sea between Great
Britain and Norway.
8.According to paragraph 5, the decision to drill for oil
depends on all of the following factors EXCEPT
A.permission to access the area where oil has been
found
B.the availability of sufficient quantities of oil in a pool
C.the location of the market in relation to the drilling
site
D.the political situation in the region where drilling
would occur
Of course, there is far more oil underground than can
be recovered. It may be in a pool too small or too far
from a potential market to justify the expense of
drilling. Some oil lies under regions where drilling is
forbidden, such as national parks or other public lands.
Even given the best extraction techniques, only about
30 to 40 percent of the oil in a given pool can be
brought to the surface. The rest is far too difficult to
extract and has to remain underground.
Moreover, getting petroleum out of the ground and
from under the sea and to the consumer can create
environmental problems anywhere along the line.
Pipelines carrying oil can be broken by faults or
landslides, causing serious oil spills. Spillage from huge
oil-carrying cargo ships, called tankers, involved in
collisions or accidental groundings (such as the one off
Alaska in 1989) can create oil slicks at sea. Offshore
platforms may also lose oil, creating oil slicks that drift
ashore and foul the beaches, harming the
environment. Sometimes, the ground at an oil field
may subside as oil is removed. The Wilmington field
near Long Beach, California, has subsided nine meters
in 50 years; protective barriers have had to be built to
prevent seawater from flooding the area. Finally, the
refining and burning of petroleum and its products can
cause air pollution. Advancing technology and strict
laws, however, are helping control some of these
adverse environmental effects.
58Continued sedimentation—the process of deposits' settling on the sea bottom—buries the organic matter and
subjects it to higher temperatures and pressures, which convert the organic matter to oil and gas. As muddy
sediments are pressed together, the gas and small droplets of oil may be squeezed out of the mud and may move
into sandy layers nearby. Over long periods of time (millions of years), accumulations of gas and oil can collect in
the sandy layers. Both oil and gas are less dense than water, so they generally tend to rise upward through
water-saturated rock and sediment. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
Unless something acts to halt this migration, these natural resources will eventually reach the surface.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. “Petroleum ”is a broad term that includes both
crude oil and natural gas.
A. Petroleum formation is the result of biological as well as chemical activity.
B. The difficulty of finding adequate sources of oil on land has resulted in a greater number of offshore drilling
sites.
C. Petroleum extraction can have a negative impact on the environment.
D. Petroleum tends to rise to the surface, since it is lower in density than water.
E. Current methods of petroleum extraction enable oil producers to recover about half of the world 's petroleum
reserves.
F. Accidents involving oil tankers occur when tankers run into shore reefs or collide with other vessels.
TPO5
TPO5-1 Minerals and Plants
1.According to paragraph 1, what is true of plants that
can grow in serpentine soil?
A.They absorb micronutrients unusually well.
B.They require far less calcium than most plants do.
C.They are able to absorb nitrogen in its elemental
state.
D.They are typically crops raised for food.
2.According to paragraph 2, which of the following
symptoms occurs in phosphorus-deficient plants but
not in plants deficient in nitrogen or iron?
A.Chlorosis on leaves
B.Change in leaf pigmentation to a dark shade of
green
C.Short, stunted appearance of stems
D.Reddish pigmentation on the leaves or stem
3.According to paragraph 2, a symptom of iron
deficiency is the presence in young leaves of
A.deep red discoloration between the veins
B.white or yellow tissue between the veins
C.dead spots between the veins
D.characteristic dark green veins
Research has shown that certain minerals are required
by plants for normal growth and development. The
soil is the source of these minerals, which are
absorbed by the plant with the water from the soil.
Even nitrogen, which is a gas in its elemental state, is
normally absorbed from the soil as nitrate ions. Some
soils are notoriously deficient in micro nutrients and
are therefore unable to support most plant life.
So-called serpentine soils, for example, are deficient in
calcium, and only plants able to tolerate low levels of
this mineral can survive. In modern agriculture,
mineral depletion of soils is a major concern, since
harvesting crops interrupts the recycling of nutrients
back to the soil.
Mineral deficiencies can often be detected by specific
symptoms such as chlorosis (loss of chlorophyll
resulting in yellow or white leaf tissue), necrosis
(isolated dead patches), anthocyanin formation
(development of deep red pigmentation of leaves or
stem), stunted growth, and development of woody
tissue in an herbaceous plant. Soils are most
commonly deficient in nitrogen and phosphorus.
Nitrogen-deficient plants exhibit many of the
symptoms just described. Leaves develop chlorosis;
stems are short and slender, and anthocyanin
discoloration occurs on stems, petioles, and lower leaf
surfaces. Phosphorus-deficient plants are often
stunted, with leaves turning a characteristic dark
green, often with the accumulation of anthocyanin.
Typically, older leaves are affected first as the
phosphorus is mobilized to young growing tissue. Iron
deficiency is characterized by chlorosis between veins
in young leaves.
4.The word “facilitates ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.slows down
B.affects
C.makes easier
D.focuses on
5.The word “suspended ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.grown
B.protected
C.spread out
D.hung
Much of the research on nutrient deficiencies is based
on growing plants hydroponically, that is, in soilless
liquid nutrient solutions. This technique allows
researchers to create solutions that selectively omit
certain nutrients and then observe the resulting
effects on the plants. Hydroponics has applicationsbeyond basic research, since it facilitates the growing
of greenhouse vegetables during winter. Aeroponics, a
technique in which plants are suspended and the
roots misted with a nutrient solution, is another
method for growing plants without soil.
While mineral deficiencies can limit the growth of
plants, an overabundance of certain minerals can be
toxic and can also limit growth. Saline soils, which
have high concentrations of sodium chloride and
other salts, limit plant growth, and research continues
to focus on developing salt-tolerant varieties of
agricultural crops. Research has focused on the toxic
effects of heavy metals such as lead, cadmium,
mercury, and aluminum; however, even copper and
zinc, which are essential elements, can become toxic
in high concentrations. Although most plants cannot
survive in these soils, certain plants have the ability to
tolerate high levels of these minerals.
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Before considering phytoremediation,
hyperaccumulating species of plants local to the target
area must be identified.
B.The investigation begins with an evaluation of toxic
sites in the target area to determine the extent of
contamination.
C.The first step in phytoremediation is the planting of
hyperaccumulating plants in the area to be cleaned
up.
D.Mines and irrigation ponds can be kept from
becoming contaminated by planting
hyperaccumulating species in targeted areas.
Scientists have known for some time that certain
plants, called hyperaccumulators, can concentrate
minerals at levels a hundredfold or greater than
normal. A survey of known hyperaccumulators
identified that 75 percent of them amassed nickel,
cobalt, copper, zinc, manganese, lead, and cadmium
are other minerals of choice. Hyperaccumulators run
the entire range of the plant world. They may be herbs,
shrubs, or trees. Many members of the mustard family,
spurge family, legume family, and grass family are top
hyperaccumulators. Many are found in tropical and
subtropical areas of the world, where accumulation of
high concentrations of metals may afford some
protection against plant-eating insects and microbial
pathogens.
Only recently have investigators considered using
these plants to clean up soil and waste sites that have
been contaminated by toxic levels of heavy metals –
an environmentally friendly approach known asphytoremediation. This scenario begins with the
planting of hyperaccumulating species in the target
area, such as an abandoned mine or an irrigation
pond contaminated by runoff. Toxic minerals would
first be absorbed by roots but later relocated to the
stem and leaves. A harvest of the shoots would
remove the toxic compounds off site to be burned or
composted to recover the metal for industrial uses.
After several years of cultivation and harvest, the site
would be restored at a cost much lower than the price
of excavation and reburial, the standard practice for
remediation of contaminated soils. For examples, in
field trials, the plant alpine pennycress removed zinc
and cadmium from soils near a zinc smelter, and Indian mustard , native to Pakistan and India, has been
effective in reducing levels of selenium salts by 50
percent in contaminated soils.
7.It can be inferred from paragraph 6 that compared
with standard practices for remediation of
contaminated soils, phytoremediation
A.does not allow for the use of the removed minerals
for industrial purposes
B.can be faster to implement
C.is equally friendly to the environment
D.is less suitable for soils that need to be used within a
short period of time8.Why does the author mention “Indian mustard ”?
A.To warn about possible risks involved in
phytoremediation
B.To help illustrate the potential of phytoremediation
C.To show that hyperaccumulating plants grow in
many regions of the world
D.To explain how zinc contamination can be reduced
Scientists have known for some time that certain plants, called hyperaccumulators, can concentrate minerals at
levels a hundredfold or greater than normal. ▌A survey of known hyperaccumulators identified that 75 percent
of them amassed nickel, cobalt, copper, zinc, manganese, lead, and cadmium are other minerals of choice. 
Hyperaccumulators run the entire range of the plant world. They may be herbs ,shrubs , or trees . Many
members of the mustard family, spurge family, legume family, and grass family are top hyperaccumulators. 
Many are found in tropical and subtropical areas of the world, where accumulation of high concentrations of
metals may afford some protection against plant-eating insects and microbial pathogens.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
could the sentence best fit?
Certain minerals are more likely to be accumulated in large quantities than others.
Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Plants need to absorb certain minerals from the
soil in adequate quantities for normal growth and development.
A. Some plants are able to accumulate extremely high levels of certain minerals and thus can be used to clean up
soils contaminated with toxic levels of these minerals.
B. Though beneficial in lower levels, high levels of salts, other minerals, and heavy metals can be harmful to
plants.
C. When plants do not absorb sufficient amounts of essential minerals, characteristic abnormalities result.
D. Because high concentrations of sodium chloride and other salts limit growth in most plants, much research has
been done in an effort to develop salt-tolerant agricultural crops.
E. Some plants can tolerate comparatively low levels of certain minerals, but such plants are of little use for
recycling nutrients back into depleted soils.
F. Mineral deficiencies in many plants can be cured by misting their roots with a nutrient solution or by
transferring the plants to a soilless nutrient solution.
TPO5-2 The Origin of the Pacific Island People
The greater Pacific region, traditionally called Oceania,
consists of three cultural areas: Melanesia, Micronesia,
and Polynesia. Melanesia, in the southwest Pacific,
contains the large islands of New Guinea, the
Solomons, Vanuatu, and New Caledonia. Micronesia,
the area north of Melanesia, consists primarily of
small scattered islands. Polynesia is the central Pacific
area in the great triangle defined by Hawaii, Easter
Island, and New Zealand. Before the arrival of
Europeans, the islands in the two largest cultural areas,
Polynesia and Micronesia, together contained a
population estimated at 700,000.
1.By stating that the theories are “ mutually exclusive ”
the author means that A.if one of the theories is true,
then all the others must be false
B.the differences between the theories are
unimportant
C.taken together, the theories cover all possibilities
D.the theories support each other
2.According to paragraph 2, which of the following led
some early researchers to believe that the Pacific
islanders originally came from Egypt?
A.Egyptians were known to have founded other great
civilizations.
B.Sailors from other parts of the world were believed
to lack the skills needed to travel across the ocean.
C.Linguistic, archaeological, and biological data
connected the islands to Egypt.
D.Egyptian accounts claimed responsibility for
colonizing the Pacific as well as the Americas.
3.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 2 about early theories of where the first
inhabitants of the Pacific islands came from?
A.They were generally based on solid evidence.
B.They tried to account for the origin of the
characteristic features of the languages spoken by
Pacific islanders.
C.They assumed that the peoples living in Southeast
Asia did not have the skills needed to sail to the Pacific
islands.
D.They questioned the ideas of G. Elliot Smith and W. J.
Perry.
Speculation on the origin of these Pacific islanders
began as soon as outsiders encountered them, in the
absence of solid linguistic, archaeological, andbiological data, many fanciful and mutually exclusive
theories were devised. Pacific islanders are variously
thought to have come from North America, South
America, Egypt, Israel, and India, as well as Southeast
Asia. Many older theories implicitly deprecated the
navigational abilities and overall cultural creativity of
the Pacific islanders. For example, British
anthropologists G. Elliot Smith and W. J. Perry
assumed that only Egyptians would have been skilled
enough to navigate and colonize the Pacific.
They
inferred that the Egyptians even crossed the Pacific to
found the great civilizations of the New World (North
and South America). In 1947 Norwegian adventurer
Thor Heyerdahl drifted on a balsa-log raft westward
with the winds and currents across the Pacific from
South America to prove his theory that Pacific
islanders were Native Americans (also called American
Indians). Later Heyerdahl suggested that the Pacific
was peopled by three migrations: by Native Americans
from the Pacific Northwest of North America drifting
to Hawaii, by Peruvians drifting to Easter Island, and
by Melanesians. In 1969 he crossed the Atlantic in an
Egyptian-style reed boat to prove Egyptian influences
in the Americas. Contrary to these theorists, the
overwhelming evidence of physical anthropology,
linguistics, and archaeology shows that the Pacific
islanders came from Southeast Asia and were skilled
enough as navigators to sail against the prevailing
winds and currents.
4.The word “implements ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.skills
B.tools
C.opportunities
D.practices
5.In paragraph 3, why does the author provide
information about the types of crops grown and boats
used in Southeast Asia during the period around 5000
B. C. E.?
A.To evaluate the relative importance of agriculture
and fishing to early Austronesian peoples
B.To illustrate the effectiveness of archaeological and
linguistic methods in discovering details about life in
ancient times
C.To contrast living conditions on the continent of Asia
with living conditions on the Pacific islands
D.To demonstrate that people from this region had the
skills and resources necessary to travel to and survive
on the Pacific islands
The basic cultural requirements for the successful
colonization of the Pacific islands include the
appropriate boat-building, sailing, and navigation skills
to get to the islands in the first place, domesticated
plants and gardening skills suited to often marginal
conditions, and a varied inventory of fishingimplements and techniques. It is now generally
believed that these prerequisites originated with
peoples speaking Austronesian languages (a group of
several hundred related languages) and began to
emerge in Southeast Asia by about 5000 B.C.E. The
culture of that time, based on archaeology and
linguistic reconstruction, is assumed to have had a
broad inventory of cultivated plants including taro,
yarns, banana, sugarcane, breadfruit, coconut, sago,
and rice. Just as important, the culture also possessed
the basic foundation for an effective maritime
adaptation, including outrigger canoes and a variety of
fishing techniques that could be effective for overseas
voyaging.
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Some people have argued that the Pacific was
settled by traders who became lost while transporting
domesticated plants and animals.
B.The original Polynesian settlers were probably
marooned on the islands, but they may have been
joined later by carefully prepared colonization
expeditions.
C.Although it seems reasonable to believe that
colonization expeditions would set out fully stocked,
this is contradicted by much of the evidence.
D.The settlement of the Pacific islands was probably
intentional and well planned rather than accidental as
some people have proposed.
7.The word “undisputed ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.mysterious
B.unexpected
C.acknowledged
D.significant8.Why does the author mention the views of “Patrick
Kirch”?
A.To present evidence in favor of Heyerdahl 's idea
about American Indians reaching Oceania
B.To emphasize the familiarity of Pacific islanders with
crops from many different regions of the world
C.To indicate that supposed proof for Heyerdahl 's
theory has an alternative explanation
D.To demonstrate that some of the same crops were
cultivated in both South America and Oceania
Contrary to the arguments of some that much of the
pacific was settled by Polynesians accidentally
marooned after being lost and adrift, it seems
reasonable that this feat was accomplished by
deliberate colonization expeditions that set out fully
stocked with food and domesticated plants and
animals. Detailed studies of the winds and currents
using computer simulations suggest that drifting
canoes would have been a most unlikely means of
colonizing the Pacific. These expeditions were likely
driven by population growth and political dynamics on
the home islands, as well as the challenge and
excitement of exploring unknown waters.
Because all Polynesians, Micronesians, and many
Melanesians speak Austronesian languages and grow
crops derived from Southeast Asia, all these peoples
most certainly derived from that region and not the New World or elsewhere. The undisputed
pre-Columbian presence in Oceania of the sweet
potato, which is a New World domesticate, has
sometimes been used to support Heyerdahl's
“American Indians in the Pacific” theories. However,
this is one plant out of a long list of Southeast Asiandomesticates. As Patrick Kirch , an American
anthropologist, points out, rather than being brought
by rafting South Americans, sweet potatoes might just
have easily been brought back by returning Polynesian
navigators who could have reached the west coast of
South America.
68Speculation on the origin of these Pacific islanders began as soon as outsiders encountered them, in the absence
of solid linguistic, archaeological, and biological data, many fanciful and mutually exclusive theories were devised.
Pacific islanders are variously thought to have come from North America, South America, Egypt, Israel, and India,
as well as Southeast Asia. Many older theories implicitly deprecated the navigational abilities and overall
cultural creativity of the Pacific islanders. For example, British anthropologists G. Elliot Smith and W. J. Perry
assumed that only Egyptians would have been skilled enough to navigate and colonize the Pacific. They inferred
that the Egyptians even crossed the Pacific to found the great civilizations of the New World (North and South
America). ▌In 1947 Norwegian adventurer Thor Heyerdahl drifted on a balsa-log raft westward with the winds
and currents across the Pacific from South America to prove his theory that Pacific islanders were Native
Americans (also called American Indians). Later Heyerdahl suggested that the Pacific was peopled by three
migrations: by Native Americans from the Pacific Northwest of North America drifting to Hawaii, by Peruvians
drifting to Easter Island, and by Melanesians. In 1969 he crossed the Atlantic in an Egyptian-style reed boat toprove Egyptian influences in the Americas. Contrary to these theorists, the overwhelming evidence of physical
anthropology, linguistics, and archaeology shows that the Pacific islanders came from Southeast Asia and were
skilled enough as navigators to sail against the prevailing winds and currents.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
could the sentence best fit?
Later theories concentrate on journeys in the other direction.
10.Choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Together, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia make
up the region described as the Pacific islands, or Oceania.
A. The first Europeans to reach the area assumed that the islands 'original inhabitants must have drifted to
Oceania, perhaps from Egypt or the Americas.
B. It is now believed that the process of colonization required a great deal of skill, determination, and planning
and could not have happened by chance.
C. Using linguistic and archaeological evidence, anthropologists have determined that the first Pacific islanders
were Austronesian people from Southeast Asia.
D. New evidence suggests that, rather than being isolated, Pacific islanders engaged in trade and social interaction
with peoples living in Southeast Asia.
E. Computer simulations of the winds and currents in the Pacific have shown that reaching the Pacific islands was
probably much easier than previously thought.
F. Although early colonizers of the islands probably came from agriculture-based societies, they were obliged to
adopt an economy based on fishing.
TPO5-3 The Cambrian Explosion
1.The word “significant ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.numerous
B.important
C.unexplained
D.sudden2.The word “diversification ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.emergence of many varieties
B.steady decline in number
C.gradual increase in body size
D.sudden disappearance
3.The period discussed in the passage is referred to asan“explosion ”because it
A.occurred 0.6 billion years ago, late in Earth 's history
B.was characterized by the unusually fast evolution of
many new life-forms
C.was characterized by widespread animal extinction
D.was characterized by violent volcanic eruptions
4.According to Paragraph 2, which of the following is
NOT a question that paleontologists asked about the
Cambrian explosion?
A.Why was the origin of life a simple step in Earth 's
history?
B.Why did it take so long for multicellular organisms to
develop?
C.Why did animal life evolve so rapidly?
D.Why does the fossil record lack evidence of animal
evolution during that time?The geologic timescale is marked by significant
geologic and biological events, including the origin of
Earth about 4.6 billion years ago, the origin of life
about 3.5 billion years ago, the origin of eukaryotic
life-forms (living things that have cells with true nuclei)
about 1.5 billion years ago, and the origin of animals
about 0.6 billion years ago. The last event marks the
beginning of the Cambrian period. Animals originated
relatively late in the history of Earth—in only the last
10 percent of Earth's history. During a geologically
brief 100-million-year period, all modern animal
groups (along with other animals that are now extinct)evolved. This rapid origin and diversification of
animals is often referred to as “the Cambrian
explosion.”
Scientists have asked important questions about thisexplosion for more than a century. Why did it occur so
late in the history of Earth? The origin of multicellular
forms of life seems a relatively simple step compared
to the origin of life itself. Why does the fossil record
not document the series of evolutionary changes
during the evolution of animals? Why did animal life
evolve so quickly? Paleontologists continue to search
the fossil record for answers to these questions.
5.Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 4 as being true of the Ediacara formation?
A.It contains fossils that date back to the Precambrian
period.
B.It contains only soft-bodied animal fossils.
C.It is located on a single site in Australia.
D.It does not contain any fossils of the ancestors of
modern animals.
One interpretation regarding the absence of fossils
during this important 100-million-year period is that
early animals were soft bodied and simply did not
fossilize. Fossilization of soft-bodied animals is less
likely than fossilization of hard-bodied animals, but it
does occur. Conditions that promote fossilization of
soft-bodied animals include very rapid covering by
sediments that create an environment that
discourages decomposition. In fact, fossil beds
containing soft-bodied animals have been known for
many years.
The Ediacara fossil formation, which contains the
oldest known animal fossils, consists exclusively of
soft-bodied forms. Although named after a site in
Australia, the Ediacara formation is worldwide in
distribution and dates to Precambrian times. This
700-million-year-old formation gives few clues to the
origins of modern animals, however, because
paleontologists believe it represents an evolutionary
experiment that failed. It contains no ancestors of
modern animal groups.
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The animals found in the Tommotian fossil bed were
once thought to belong to a variety of modern animal
groups, but now they are thought to have descended
from a single group.
B.Animals in the Tommotian fossil beds were initially
assigned to modern animal groups but are now
thought to belong to groups that emerged and died
out during the Cambrian period.
C.Though at first they thought otherwise,
paleontologists now agree that the animals in the
Tommotian have body forms from which modern
animals have descended.
D.It is unclear whether the Tommotian fossils from the
early Cambrian period represent unique body forms or
whether they should be assigned to various modern
animal groups.
7.“Sidneyia”is an example of
A.a relative of Anomalocaris and Wiwaxia
B.a previously unknown Burgess Shale animal
C.an extinct member of a currently existing category
of animals
D.an animal that cannot be assigned to any modern
animal group
A slightly younger fossil formation containing animal
remains is the Tommotian formation, named after a
locale in Russia. It dates to the very early Cambrianperiod, and it also contains only soft-bodied forms. At
one time, the animals present in these fossil beds
were assigned to various modern animal groups, but
most paleontologists now agree that all Tommotian
fossils represent unique body forms that arose in the
early Cambrian period and disappeared before the
end of the period, leaving no descendants in modern
animal groups.
A.third fossil formation containing both soft-bodied
and hard-bodied animals provides evidence of the
result of the Cambrian explosion. This fossil formation,
called the Burgess Shale, is in Yoho National Park in
the Canadian Rocky Mountains of British Columbia.
Shortly after the Cambrian explosion, mud slides
rapidly buried thousands of marine animals under
conditions that favored fossilization. These fossil beds
provide evidence of about 32 modern animal groups,
plus about 20 other animal body forms that are so
different from any modern animals that they cannot
be assigned to any one of the modern groups. These
unassignable animals include a large swimming
predator called Anomalocaris and a soft-bodied
animal called Wiwaxia, which ate detritus or algae.
The Burgess Shale formation also has fossils of many
extinct representatives of modern animal groups. For
example, a well-known Burgess Shale animal called Sidneyia is a representative of a previously unknown
group of arthropods (a category of animals that
includes insects, spiders, mites, and crabs).
8.What can be inferred from paragraph 7 about why
the Cambrian explosion is so unusual?
A.It generated new ecological niches through the
extinction of many unique animals.
B.It was a period of rapid evolution, and evolution is
often thought of as a slow process.
C.It is a period whose evolutionary sequences are
clearly marked.
D.It generated a very large number of ancient fossil
beds containing soft-bodied animals.
Fossil formations like the Burgess Shale show that
evolution cannot always be thought of as a slow
progression. The Cambrian explosion involved rapid
evolutionary diversification, followed by the extinction
of many unique animals. Why was this evolution so
rapid? No one really knows. Many zoologists believe
that it was because so many ecological niches were
available with virtually no competition from existing
species. Will zoologists ever know the evolutionary
sequences in the Cambrian explosion? Perhaps
another ancient fossil bed of soft-bodied animals from
600-million-year-old seas is awaiting discovery.
One interpretation regarding the absence of fossils during this important 100-million-year period is that early
animals were soft bodied and simply did not fossilize. Fossilization of soft-bodied animals is less likely than
fossilization of hard-bodied animals, but it does occur. Conditions that promote fossilization of soft-bodied
animals include very rapid covering by sediments that create an environment that discourages decomposition. 
In fact, fossil beds containing soft-bodied animals have been known for many years. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
could the sentence best fit?
It is relatively rare because the fossilization of soft-bodied animals requires a special environment.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The term “Cambrian explosion ”refers to the
geologically brief period during which all modern animal groups evolved.
A. Little is known about the stages of evolution during the Cambrian period, in part because early animals were
soft bodied and could fossilize only under particular conditions.
B. While animal fossils from before the Cambrian explosion have no modern descendants, many animals that
evolved during the Cambrian explosion can be assigned to modern groups.
C. The Cambrian period is significant because it marks the emergence of eukaryotic life-forms —organisms that
have cells with true nuclei.
D. The Ediacara fossil formation provides the most information about the Cambrian explosion, while the earlier,
Tommotian and Burgess Shale formations give clues about Precambrian evolution.
E. Zoologists are awaiting the discovery of a 600-million-year-old fossil formation in order to be able to form a
theory of how animal evolution progressed.
F. Although the reasons for the rapid evolution of animals during the Cambrian period are not known, one
proposed explanation is an abundance of niches with a lack of competitors.
TPO6
TPO6-1 Powering the Industrial Revolution
1.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information ．
A.Running water was the best power source for
factories since it could keep machines operating
continuously, but since it was abundant only in
Lancashire and Scotland, most mills and factories that
were located elsewhere could not be water driven.
B.The disadvantage of using waterpower is that
streams do not necessarily flow in places that are the
most suitable for factories, which explains why so
many water-powered grain and textile mills were
located in undesirable places.
C.Since machines could be operated continuously only
where running water was abundant, grain and textile
mills, as well as other factories, tended to be located
only in Lancashire and Scotland.
D.Running water was the only source of power that
was suitable for the continuous operation of machines,
but to make use of it, factories had to be located
where the water was, regardless of whether such
locations made sense otherwise.
In Britain one of the most dramatic changes of the
Industrial Revolution was the harnessing of power.
Until the reign of George Ⅲ(1760-1820), available
sources of power for work and travel had not
increased since the Middle Ages. There were three
sources of power: animal or human muscles; the wind,operating on sail or windmill; and running water. Only
the last of these was suited at all to the continuous
operating of machines, and although waterpower
abounded in Lancashire and Scotland and ran grain
mills as well as textile mills, it had one great
disadvantage: streams flowed where nature intended
them to, and water-driven factories had to be located
on their banks whether or not the location was
desirable for other reasons. Furthermore, even the
most reliable waterpower varied with the seasons and
disappeared in a drought. The new age of machinery,
in short, could not have been born without a new
source of both movable and constant power.
2.The word “exploited ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.utilized
B.recognized
C.examined
D.fully understood3.According to paragraph 2, the “atmospheric
engine”was slow because
A.it had been designed to be used in coal mines
B.the cylinder had to cool between each stroke
C.it made use of expanding steam to raise the piston
in its cylinder
D.it could be operated only when a large supply of fuel
was available
4.According to paragraph 2, Watt's steam engine
differed from earlier steam engines in each of the
following ways EXCEPT:
A.It used steam to move a piston in a cylinder.
B.It worked with greater speed.
C.It was more efficient in its use of fuel.
D.It could be used in many different ways.
The source had long been known but not exploited .
Early in the eighteenth century, a pump had come into
use in which expanding steam raised a piston in a
cylinder, and atmospheric pressure brought it down
again when the steam condensed inside the cylinderto form a vacuum. This “atmospheric engine ,”
invented by Thomas Savery and vastly improved by his
partner, Thomas Newcomen, embodied revolutionary
principles, but it was so slow and wasteful of fuel that
it could not be employed outside the coal mines for
which it had been designed. In the 1760s, James Watt
perfected a separate condenser for the steam, so that
the cylinder did not have to be cooled at every stroke;
then he devised a way to make the piston turn a
wheel and thus convert reciprocating (back and forth)
motion into rotary motion. He thereby transformed an
inefficient pump of limited use into a steam engine of
a thousand uses. The final step came when steam was
introduced into the cylinder to drive the piston
backward as well as forward, thereby increasing the
speed of the engine and cutting its fuel consumption.
5.In paragraph 3, the author mentions William
Murdoch 's invention of a new form of nighttime
illumination in order to
A.indicate one of the important developments made
possible by the introduction of Watt's steam engine
B.make the point that Watt's steam engine was not
the only invention of importance to the Industrial
Revolution
C.illustrate how important coal was as a raw material
for the Industrial Revolution
D.provide an example of another eighteenth-century
invention that used steam as a power source Watt's steam engine soon showed what it could do. It
liberated industry from dependence on running water.
The engine eliminated water in the mines by driving
efficient pumps, which made possible deeper and
deeper mining. The ready availability of coal inspired
William Murdoch during the 1790s to develop the first
new form of nighttime illumination to be discovered in
a millennium and a half. Coal gas rivaled smoky oil
lamps and flickering candles, and early in the new
century, well-to-do Londoners grew accustomed to
gaslit houses and even streets. Iron manufacturers,
which had starved for fuel while depending on
charcoal, also benefited from ever-increasing supplies
of coal: blast furnaces with steam-powered bellows
turned out more iron and steel for the new machinery.
Steam became the motive force of the Industrial
Revolution as coal and iron ore were the raw
materials.
6.The word “retained”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.gained
B.established
C.profited from
D.maintained
7.According to paragraph 4, which of the following
statements about steam engines is true?
A.They were used for the production of paper but not
for printing.
B.By 1800, significant numbers of them were
produced outside of Britain.
C.They were used in factories before they were used
to power trains.
D.They were used in the construction of canals and
turnpikes.
8.According to paragraph 4, providing a machine to
take the place of the horse involved combining which
two previously separate ingredients?
A.Turnpikes and canals
B.Stationary steam engines and wagons with flanged
wheels
C.Metal rails in roadbeds and wagons capable of
carrying heavy loads
D.Canal boats and heavily laden wagons
By 1800 more than a thousand steam engines were in
use in the British Isles, and Britain retained a virtual
monopoly on steam engine production until the 1830s.
Steam power did not merely spin cotton and roll iron;
early in the new century, it also multiplied ten times
over the amount of paper that a single worker could
produce in a day. At the same time, operators of the
first printing presses run by steam rather than by hand
found it possible to produce a thousand pages in an
hour rather than thirty. Steam also promised to
eliminate a transportation problem not fully solved by
either canal boats or turnpikes. Boats could carry
heavy weights, but canals could not cross hilly terrain;
turnpikes could cross the hills, but the roadbeds could
not stand up under great weights. These problems
needed still another solution, and the ingredients for
it lay close at hand. In some industrial regions, heavily
laden wagons, with flanged wheels, were being hauled
by horses along metal rails; and the stationary steam
engine was puffing in the factory and mine. Another
generation passed before inventors succeeded in
combining these ingredients, by putting the engine on
wheels and the wheels on the rails, so as to provide a
machine to take the place of the horse. Thus the
railroad age sprang from what had already happened
in the eighteenth century.
78▌Watt's steam engine soon showed what it could do. It liberated industry from dependence on running water.
The engine eliminated water in the mines by driving efficient pumps, which made possible deeper and deeper
mining. The ready availability of coal inspired William Murdoch during the 1790s to develop the first new form
of nighttime illumination to be discovered in a millennium and a half. Coal gas rivaled smoky oil lamps and
flickering candles, and early in the new century, well-to-do Londoners grew accustomed to gaslit houses and even
streets. Iron manufacturers, which had starved for fuel while depending on charcoal, also benefited from
ever-increasing supplies of coal: blast furnaces with steam-powered bellows turned out more iron and steel for
the new machinery. Steam became the motive force of the Industrial Revolution as coal and iron ore were the raw
materials.
9Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage ．Where
would the sentence best fit?
The factories did not have to go to the streams when power could come to the factories ．
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The Industrial Revolution would not have been
possible without a new source of power that was efficient, movable, and continuously available.
A. In the early eighteenth century, Savery and Newcomen discovered that expanding steam could be used to raise
a piston in a cylinder.
B. Watt's steam engine played a leading role in greatly increasing industrial production of all kinds.
C. Until the 1830s, Britain was the world 's major producer of steam engines.
D. In the mid-1700s James Watt transformed an inefficient steam pump into a fast, flexible, fuel-efficient engine.
E. In the 1790s William Murdoch developed a new way of lighting houses and streets using coal gas.
F. The availability of steam engines was a major factor in the development of railroads, which solved a major
transportation problem.
TPO6-2 William Smith
1.According to paragraph 1, which of the following
statements about William Smith is NOT true?
A.Smith learned surveying by reading and by
apprenticing for a local surveyor.
B.Smith's family lived in a small English town and
possessed little wealth.
C.Smith learned about fossils from books he borrowed
from his uncle.
D.Smith eventually left his village to work on the
excavation of an English canal.
2.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 2 about canal building?
A.Canals were built primarily in the south of England
rather than in other regions.
B.Canal building decreased after the steam locomotive
was invented.
C.Canal building made it difficult to study rock strata
which often became damaged in the process.
D.Canal builders hired surveyors like Smith to examine
exposed rock strata.
In 1769 in a little town in Oxfordshire, England, a child
with the very ordinary name of William Smith was
born into the poor family of a village blacksmith. He
received rudimentary village schooling, but mostly he
roamed his uncle's farm collecting the fossils that
were so abundant in the rocks of the Cotswold hills.
When he grew older, William Smith taught himself
surveying from books he bought with his small savings,
and at the age of eighteen he was apprenticed to a
surveyor of the local parish. He then proceeded to
teach himself geology, and when he was twenty-four,
he went to work for the company that was excavating
the Somerset Coal Canal in the south of England.
This was before the steam locomotive, and canal
building was at its height. The companies building the
canals to transport coal needed surveyors to help
them find the coal deposits worth mining as well as to
determine the best courses for the canals. This job
gave Smith an opportunity to study the fresh rock
outcrops created by the newly dug canal. He later
worked on similar jobs across the length and breadth
of England, all the while studying the newly revealed
strata and collecting all the fossils he could find. Smith
used mail coaches to travel as much as 10,000 miles
per year. In 1815 he published the first modern
geological map, “A Map of the Strata of England and
Wales with a Part of Scotland,” a map so meticulously
researched that it can still be used today.
3.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The discovery of regional differences in the
sequences of rocks led geologists to believe that rock
types could someday become reliable time markers.
B.Careful analysis of strata revealed that rocks cannot
establish geological time because the pattern of rock
layers varies from place to place.
C.Smith's catalogs of rock strata indicated that the
sequences of rocks are different from place to place
and from region to region.
D.Because people did not catalog regional differences
in sequences of rocks, it was believed that rocks could
never be reliable time markers.
This was before the steam locomotive, and canal
building was at its height. The companies building the
canals to transport coal needed surveyors to help
them find the coal deposits worth mining as well as to
determine the best courses for the canals. This job
gave Smith an opportunity to study the fresh rock
outcrops created by the newly dug canal. He later
worked on similar jobs across the length and breadth
of England, all the while studying the newly revealed
strata and collecting all the fossils he could find. Smith
used mail coaches to travel as much as 10,000 miles
per year. In 1815 he published the first modern
geological map, “A Map of the Strata of England and
Wales with a Part of Scotland, ” a map someticulously researched that it can still be used today.
In 1831 when Smith was finally recognized by the
Geological Society of London as the “father of English
geology,”it was not only for his maps but also for
something even more important. Ever since people
had begun to catalog the strata in particular outcrops,
there had been the hope that these could somehowbe used to calculate geological time. But as more and
more accumulations of strata were cataloged in more
and more places, it became clear that the sequences
of rocks sometimes differed from region to region
and that no rock type was ever going to become a
reliable time marker throughout the world. Even
without the problem of regional differences, rocks
present a difficulty as unique time markers. Quartz is
quartz—a silicon ion surrounded by four oxygen ions
—there's no difference at all between
two-million-year-old Pleistocene quartz and Cambrian
quartz created over 500 million years ago.
4.According to paragraph 4, it was difficult for Smith to
distinguish rock strata because
A.the rocks from different strata closely resembled
each other
B.he was often unable to find fossils in the younger
rock strata
C.their similarity to each other made it difficult for him
to distinguish one rock type from another
D.the type of rock between two consistent strata was
always the same5.The word “endured”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.vanished
B.developed
C.varied
D.survived
As he collected fossils from strata throughout England,
Smith began to see that the fossils told a different
story from the rocks. Particularly in the younger strata,
the rocks were often so similar that he had trouble
distinguishing the strata, but he never had trouble
telling the fossils apart. While rock between two
consistent strata might in one place be shale and in
another sandstone, the fossils in that shale or
sandstone were always the same. Some fossilsendured through so many millions of years that they
appear in many strata, but others occur only in a few
strata, and a few species had their births and
extinctions within one particular stratum. Fossils are
thus identifying markers for particular periods in
Earth's history.
6.The word “virtually”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.possibly
B.absolutely
C.surprisingly
D.nearly
7.Select the TWO answer choices that are true
statements based upon the discussion of the principle
of faunal succession in paragraph 5. To receive credit,
you must select TWO answers.
A.It was a principle that applied to fauna but not to
flora.
B.It was discovered independently by two different
geologists.
C.It describes how fossils are distributed in rock strata.
D.It explains why plants and animals undergo
transformations through time.
8.In mentioning " trilobite”, the author is making
which of the following points?
A.Fossils cannot be found in more than one rock
stratum.
B.Faunal succession can help put rock layers in relative
temporal sequence.
C.Faunal succession cannot be applied to different
strata composed of the same kind of rock.
D.The presence of trilobite fossils makes it difficult to
date a rock.
Not only could Smith identify rock strata by the fossils
they contained, he could also see a pattern emerging:
certain fossils always appear in more ancient
sediments, while others begin to be seen as the strata
become more recent. By following the fossils, Smith
was able to put all the strata of England's earth into
relative temporal sequence. About the same time,
Georges Cuvier made the same discovery while
studying the rocks around Paris.
Soon it was realized that this principle of faunal
(animal) succession was valid not only in England or France but virtually everywhere. It was actually a
principle of floral succession as well, because plants
showed the same transformation through time as did
fauna. Limestone may be found in the Cambrian or —
300 million years later —in the Jurassic strata, but atrilobite—the ubiquitous marine arthropod that had
its birth in the Cambrian —will never be found in
Jurassic strata, nor a dinosaur in the Cambrian.
83Not only could Smith identify rock strata by the fossils they contained, he could also see a pattern emerging:
certain fossils always appear in more ancient sediments, while others begin to be seen as the strata become more
recent. By following the fossils, Smith was able to put all the strata of England's earth into relative temporal
sequence. About the same time, Georges Cuvier made the same discovery while studying the rocks around
Paris.
Soon it was realized that this principle of faunal (animal) succession was valid not only in England or France but
virtually everywhere. It was actually a principle of floral succession as well, because plants showed the same
transformation through time as did fauna. Limestone may be found in the Cambrian or —300 million years later —
in the Jurassic strata, but a trilobite—the ubiquitous marine arthropod that had its birth in the Cambrian —will
never be found in Jurassic strata, nor a dinosaur in the Cambrian.
9.Look at the four squares [ ]that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
The findings of these geologists inspired others to examine the rock and fossil records in different parts of the
world．
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. William Smith 's contributions to geology have
increased our knowledge of the Earth 's history.
A. Smith found success easily in his profession because he came from a family of geologists and surveyors.
B. Smith's work on canals allowed him to collect fossils and study rock layers all over England.
C. Smith found that fossils are much more reliable indicators of geological time than rock strata are.
D. Smith was named “the father of English geology ”for his maps rather than for his other contributions to the
field.
E. Smith and Cuvier discovered that fossil patterns are easier to observe in ancient rock strata than in younger rock
strata.
F. The discovery of the principle of faunal succession allowed geologists to establish the relative age of Earth 's
rock layers.
TPO6-3 Infantile Amnesia
1.What purpose does paragraph 2 serve in the larger
discussion of children 's inability to recall early
experiences?
A.To argue that theories that are not substantiated by
evidence should generally be considered unreliable
B.To argue that the hypotheses mentioned in
paragraph 2 have been more thoroughly researched
than have the theories mentioned later in the passage
C.To explain why some theories about infantile
amnesia are wrong before presenting ones more likely
to be true
D.To explain why infantile amnesia is of great interest
to researchers
2.All of the following theories about the inability to
recall early experiences are rejected in paragraph 2
EXCEPT:
A.The ability to recall an event decreases as the time
after the event increases.
B.Young children are not capable of forming memories
that last for more than a short time.
C.People may hold back sexually meaningful
memories.
D.Most events in childhood are too ordinary to be
worth remembering.
What do you remember about your life before you
were three? Few people can remember anything that
happened to them in their early years. Adults'
memories of the next few years also tend to be scanty.
Most people remember only a few events—usually
ones that were meaningful and distinctive, such as
being hospitalized or a sibling's birth.
How might this inability to recall early experiences be
explained? The sheer passage of time does not
account for it; adults have excellent recognition of
pictures of people who attended high school with
them 35 years earlier. Another seemingly plausible
explanation—that infants do not form enduring
memories at this point in development—also is
incorrect. Children two and a half to three years old
remember experiences that occurred in their first year,
and eleven month olds remember some events a year
later. Nor does the hypothesis that infantile amnesia
reflects repression—or holding back—of sexually
charged episodes explain the phenomenon. While
such repression may occur, people cannot remember
ordinary events from the infant and toddler periods
either.
3.What does paragraph 3 suggest about long-term
memory in children?
A.Maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain is
important for the long-term memory of motor
activities but not verbal descriptions.
B.Young children may form long-term memories of
actions they see earlier than of things they hear or are
told.
C.Young children have better long-term recall of short
verbal exchanges than of long ones.
D.Children 's long-term recall of motor activities
increases when such activities are accompanied by
explicit verbal descriptions.
4.According to paragraph 4, what role may storytelling
play in forming childhood memories?
A.It may encourage the physiological maturing of the
brain.
B.It may help preschool children tell the difference
between ordinary and unusual memories.
C.It may help preschool children retrieve memories
quickly.
D.It may provide an ordered structure that facilitates
memory retrieval.
Three other explanations seem more promising. One
involves physiological changes relevant to memory.
Maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain continues
throughout early childhood, and this part of the brain
may be critical for remembering particular episodes in
ways that can be retrieved later. Demonstrations of
infants' and toddlers' long-term memory have
involved their repeating motor activities that they had
seen or done earlier, such as reaching in the dark for
objects, putting a bottle in a doll 's mouth, or pulling
apart two pieces of a toy. The brain 's level of
physiological maturation may support these types of
memories, but not ones requiring explicit verbal
descriptions.
A.second explanation involves the influence of the
social world on children 's language use. Hearing and
telling stories about events may help children store
information in ways that will endure into later
childhood and adulthood. Through hearing stories
with a clear beginning, middle, and ending children
may learn to extract the gist of events in ways that
they will be able to describe many years later.
Consistent with this view, parents and children
increasingly engage in discussions of past events when
children are about three years old. However, hearing
such stories is not sufficient for younger children to
form enduring memories. Telling such stories to two
year olds does not seem to produce long-lasting
verbalizable memories.
5.The word “critically”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.fundamentally
B.partially
C.consistently
D.subsequently6.The phrase “This view ”in the passage refers to the
belief that
A.the ability to retrieve a memory partly depends on
the similarity between the encoding and retrieving
process
B.the process of encoding information is less complex
for adults than it is for young adults and infants
C.infants and older children are equally dependent on
discussion of past events for the retrieval of
information
D.infants encode information in the same way older
children and adults do
7.According to paragraphs 5 and 6, one disadvantage
very young children face in processing information is
that they cannot
A.process a lot of information at one time
B.organize experiences according to type
C.block out interruptions
D.interpret the tone of adult language
A third likely explanation for infantile amnesia involves
incompatibilities between the ways in which infants
encode information and the ways in which older
children and adults retrieve it. Whether people canremember an event depends critically on the fit
between the way in which they earlier encoded the
information and the way in which they later attempt
to retrieve it. The better able the person is to
reconstruct the perspective from which the material
was encoded, the more likely that recall will be
successful.
This view is supported by a variety of factors that can
create mismatches between very young children's
encoding and older children's and adults' retrieval
efforts. The world looks very different to a person
whose head is only two or three feet above the
ground than to one whose head is five or six feet
above it. Older children and adults often try to
retrieve the names of things they saw, but infants
would not have encoded the information verbally.
General knowledge of categories of events such as a
birthday party or a visit to the doctor's office helps
older individuals encode their experiences, but again,
infants and toddlers are unlikely to encode many
experiences within such knowledge structures.
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Incomplete physiological development may partly
explain why hearing stories does not improve
long-term memory in infants and toddlers.
B.One reason why preschoolers fail to comprehend
the stories they hear is that they are physiologically
immature.
C.Given the chance to hear stories, infants and
toddlers may form enduring memories despite
physiological immaturity.
D.Physiologically mature children seem to have no
difficulty remembering stories they heard as
preschoolers.
These three explanations of infantile amnesia are not
mutually exclusive; indeed, they support each other.
Physiological immaturity may be part of why infants
and toddlers do not form extremely enduring
memories, even when they hear stories that promote
such remembering in preschoolers. Hearing the
stories may lead preschoolers to encode aspects of
events that allow them to form memories they can
access as adults. Conversely, improved encoding of
what they hear may help them better understand and
remember stories and thus make the stories more
useful for remembering future events. Thus, all three
explanations —physiological maturation, hearing and
producing stories about past events, and improved
encoding of key aspects of events —seem likely to be
involved in overcoming infantile amnesia.
What do you remember about your life before you were three? Few people can remember anything that
happened to them in their early years. Adults' memories of the next few years also tend to be scanty. Most
people remember only a few events—usually ones that were meaningful and distinctive, such as being
hospitalized or a sibling's birth. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
Other important occasions are school graduations and weddings.
Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. There are several possible explanations why people
cannot easily remember their early childhoods.
A. Preschoolers typically do not recall events from their first year.
B. Frontal lobe function of the brain may need to develop before memory retrieval can occur.
C. Children recall physical activities more easily if they are verbalized.
D. The opportunity to hear chronologically narrated stories may help three-year-old children produce long-lasting
memories.
E. The content of a memory determines the way in which it is encoded.
F. The contrasting ways in which young children and adults process information may determine their relative
success in remembering.
TPO7
TPO7-1 The Geologic History of the Mediterranean
1.Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 1 as a change that occurred in the fauna of
the Mediterranean?
A.Most invertebrate species disappeared during a
wave of extinctions.
B.A few hardy species wiped out many of the
Mediterranean 's invertebrates.
C.Some invertebrates migrated to Atlantic Ocean.
D.New species of fauna populated the Mediterranean
when the old migrants returned.
In 1970 geologists Kenneth J. Hsu and William B.F.
Ryan were collecting research data while aboard the
oceanographic research vessel Glomar Challenger. Anobjective of this particular cruise was to investigate
the floor of the Mediterranean and to resolve
questions about its geologic history. One question was
related to evidence that the invertebrate fauna
(animals without spines) of the Mediterranean had
changed abruptly about 6 million years ago. Most of
the older organisms were nearly wiped out, although
a few hardy species survived. A few managed to
migrate into the Atlantic. Somewhat later, the
migrants returned, bringing new species with them.
Why did the near extinction and migrations occur?
Another task for the Glomar Challenger's scientists
was to try to determine the origin of the domelike
masses buried deep beneath the Mediterranean
seafloor. These structures had been detected years
earlier by echo-sounding instruments, but they had
never been penetrated in the course of drilling.
Were
they salt domes such as are common along the United
States Gulf Coast, and if so, why should there have
been so much solid crystalline salt beneath the floor
of the Mediterranean?
2.What does the author imply by saying “Not a single
pebble was found that might have indicated that the
pebbles came from the nearby continent ”?
A.The most obvious explanation for the origin of the
pebbles was not supported by the evidence.
B.The geologists did not find as many pebbles as they
expected.
C.The geologists were looking for a particular kind of
pebble.
D.The different pebbles could not have come from
only one source.
3.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 3 about the solid gypsum layer?
A.It did not contain any marine fossil.
B.It had formed in open-ocean conditions.
C.It had once been soft, deep-sea mud.
D.It contained sediment from nearby deserts.
4.What is the main purpose of paragraph 3?
A.To describe the physical evidence collected by Hsu
and Ryan
B.To explain why some of the questions posed earlier
in the passage could not be answered by the findings
of the Glomar Challenger
C.To evaluate techniques used by Hsu and Ryan to
explore the sea floor
D.To describe the most difficult problems faced by the
Glomar Challenger expedition
With question such as these clearly before them, the
scientists aboard the Glomar Challenger processed to
the Mediterranean to search for the answers. On
August 23, 1970, they recovered a sample. The sample
consisted of pebbles of hardened sediment that had
once been soft, deep-sea mud, as well as granules ofgypsum and fragments of volcanic rock. Not a single
pebble was found that might have indicated that the
pebbles came from the nearby continent. In the days
following, samples of solid gypsum were repeatedly
brought on deck as drilling operations penetrated the
seafloor. Furthermore, the gypsum was found to
possess peculiarities of composition and structure that
suggested it had formed on desert flats. Sediment
above and below the gypsum layer contained tiny
marine fossils, indicating open-ocean conditions. As
they drilled into the central and deepest part of the
Mediterranean basin, the scientists took solid, shiny,
crystalline salt from the core barrel. Interbedded with
the salt were thin layers of what appeared to be
windblown silt.
5.The word “scores”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.members
B.large numbers
C.populations
D.different types
6.According to paragraph 4, what caused most
invertebrate species in the Mediterranean to become
extinct?
A..
The evaporation of chemicals necessary for their
survival
B.Crustal movements that connected the
Mediterranean to the saltier Atlantic
C.The migration of new species through the narrow
straits
D.Their inability to tolerate the increasing salt content
of the Mediterranean
7.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The strait of Gibraltar reopened when the
Mediterranean and the Atlantic became connected
and the cascades of water from one sea to the other
caused crustal adjustments and faulting.
B.The Mediterranean was dramatically refilled by
water from the Atlantic when crustal adjustments and
faulting opened the Strait of Gibraltar, the place where
the two seas are joined.
C.The cascades of water from the Atlantic to the
Mediterranean were not as spectacular as the crustal
adjustments and faulting that occurred when the
Strait of Gibraltar was connected to those seas.
D.As a result of crustal adjustments and faulting and
the creation of the Strait of Gibraltar, the Atlantic and
Mediterranean were connected and became a single
sea with spectacular cascades of water between them.
The time had come to formulate a hypothesis. The
investigators theorized that about 20 million years ago,
the Mediterranean was a broad seaway linked to the
Atlantic by two narrow straits. Crustal movements
closed the straits, and the landlocked Mediterranean
began to evaporate. Increasing salinity caused by theevaporation resulted in the extermination of scores of
invertebrate species. Only a few organisms especially
tolerant of very salty conditions remained. As
evaporation continued, the remaining brine (salt
water) became so dense that the calcium sulfate of
the hard layer was precipitated. In the central deeper
part of the basin, the last of the brine evaporated to
precipitate more soluble sodium chloride (salt). Later,
under the weight of overlying sediments, this salt
flowed plastically upward to form salt domes. Before
this happened, however, the Mediterranean was a
vast desert 3,000 meters deep. Then, about 5.5 millionyears ago came the deluge. A s a result of crustal
adjustments and faulting, the Strait of Gibraltar,
where the Mediterranean now connects to the
Atlantic, opened, and water cascaded spectacularly
back into the Mediterranean. Turbulent waters tore
into the hardened salt flats, broke them up, and
ground them into the pebbles observed in the first
sample taken by the Challenger. As the basin was
refilled, normal marine organisms returned. Soon
layer of oceanic ooze began to accumulate above the
old hard layer.
8.The word “Turbulent ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Fresh
B.Deep
C.Violent
D.Temperate
Another task for the Glomar Challenger 's scientists was to try to determine the origin of the domelike masses
buried deep beneath the Mediterranean seafloor. These structures had been detected years earlier by
echo-sounding instruments, but they had never been penetrated in the course of drilling. Were they salt
domes such as are common along the United States Gulf Coast, and if so, why should there have been so much
solid crystalline salt beneath the floor of the Mediterranean? 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
Thus, scientists had information about the shape of the domes but not about their chemical composition and
origin.
10.Direction: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. An expedition to the Mediterranean answered some
long-standing questions about the ocean 's history.
A. The Glomar Challenger expedition investigated changes in invertebrate fauna and some unusual geologic
features.
B. Researchers collected fossils to determine which new species migrated from the Atlantic with older species.
C. Scientists aboard the Glomar Challenger were the first to discover the existence of domelike masses underneath
the seafloor.
D. Samples recovered from the expedition revealed important differences in chemical composition and fossil
distribution among the sediment layers.
E. Evidence collected by the Glomar Challenger supports geologists' beliefs that the Mediterranean had
evaporated and become a desert, before it refilled with water.
F. Mediterranean salt domes formed after crustal movements opened the straits between the Mediterranean and
the Atlantic, and the Mediterranean refilled with water.
TPO7-2 Ancient Rome and Greece
1.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The regularity and power of stone walls inspired
Romans attempting to unify the parts of their realm.
B.Although the Romans used different types of
designs when building their walls, they used regular
controls to maintain their realm.
C.Several types of control united the Roman realm,
just as design and cement held Roman walls together.
D.Romans built walls to unite the various parts of their
realm into a single entity, which was controlled by
powerful laws.
2.The phrase “obsession with ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.thinking about
B.fixation on
C.interest in
D.attitude toward3.Why does the author mention “Alexander the
Great”in the passage?
A.To acknowledge that Greek civilization also
expanded by land conquest
B.To compare Greek leaders to Roman leaders
C.To give an example of Greek leader whom Romans
studied
D.To indicate the superior organization of the Greek
military
There is a quality of cohesiveness about the Roman
world that applied neither to Greece nor perhaps to
any other civilization, ancient or modern. Like the
stone of Roman wall, which were held together both
by the regularity of the design and by that peculiarly
powerful Roman cement, so the various parts of the
Roman realm were bonded into a massive,
monolithic entity by physical, organizational, and
psychological controls. The physical bonds included
the network of military garrisons, which were
stationed in every province, and the network of
stone-built roads that linked the provinces with Rome.
The organizational bonds were based on the common
principles of law and administration and on the
universal army of officials who enforced common
standards of conduct. The psychological controls were
built on fear and punishment—on the absolute
certainty that anyone or anything that threatened the
authority of Rome would be utterly destroyed.
The source of Roman obsession with unity and
cohesion may well have lain in the pattern of Rome 's
early development. Whereas Greece had grown from
scores of scattered cities, Rome grew from one single
organism. While the Greek world had expanded along
the Mediterranean seas lanes, the Roman world was
assembled by territorial conquest. Of course, thecontrast is not quite so stark: in Alexander the Great
the Greeks had found the greatest territorial
conqueror of all time; and the Romans, once they
moved outside Italy, did not fail to learn the lessons of
sea power. Yet the essential difference is undeniable.
The key to the Greek world lay in its high-powered
ships; the key to Roman power lay in its marching
legions. The Greeks were wedded to the sea; the
Romans, to the land. The Greek was a sailor at heart;
the Roman, a landsman.
4.Paragraph 3 suggests which of the following about
the people of Latium?
A.Their economy was based on trade relations with
other settlements.
B.They held different values than the people of Rome.
C.Agriculture played a significant role in the society.
D.They possessed unusual knowledge of animal
instincts.
5.Paragraph 4 indicates that some historians admire
Roman civilization because of
A.the diversity of cultures within Roman society
B.its strength
C.its innovative nature
D.the large body of literature that it developed
6.In paragraph 4, the author develops a description of
Roman civilization by
A.comparing the opinions of Roman intellectuals to
Greek intellectuals
B.identifying which characteristics of Roman
civilization were copied from Greece
C.explaining how the differences between Roman and
Greece developed as time passed
D.contrasting characteristics of Roman civilization with
characteristics of Greek civilization
Certainly, in trying to explain the Roman phenomenon,
one would have to place great emphasis on this
almost instinct for the territorial imperative. Roman
priorities lay in the organization, exploitation, and
defense of their territory. In all probability it was the
fertile plain of Latium, where the Latins who founded
Rome originated, that created the habits and skills of
landed settlement, landed property, landed economy,
landed administration, and a land-based society. From
this arose the Roman genius for military organization
and orderly government. In turn, a deep attachment
to the land, and to the stability which rural life
engenders, fostered the Roman virtues: gravitas, a
sense of responsibility, pietas, a sense of devotion to
family and country, and iustitia, a sense of the natural
order.
7.According to paragraph 4, intellectual Romans such
as Horace held which of the following opinions about
their civilization?
A.Ancient works of Greece held little value in the
Roman world.
B.The Greek civilization had been surpassed by the
Romans.
C.Roman civilization produced little that was original
or memorable.
D.Romans valued certain types of innovations that had
been ignored by ancient Greeks.
Modern attitudes to Roman civilization range from the
infinitely impressed to the thoroughly disgusted. As
always, there are the power worshippers, especially
among historians, who are predisposed to admire
whatever is strong, who feel more attracted to the
might of Rome than to the subtlety of Greece. At the
same time, there is a solid body of opinion that
dislikes Rome. For many, Rome is at best the imitator
and the continuator of Greece on a larger scale. Greek
civilization had quality; Rome, mere quantity. Greece
was original; Rome, derivative. Greece had style;
Rome had money. Greece was the inventor; Rome, the
research and development division. Such indeed was
the opinion of some of the more intellectual Romans.
“Had the Greeks held novelty in such disdain as we, ”
asked Horace in his epistle, “what work of ancient
date would now exist? ”
Rome's debt to Greece was enormous. The Romans
adopted Greek religion and moral philosophy. In
literature, Greek writers were consciously used as
models by their Latin successors. It was absolutely
accepted that an educated Roman should be fluent in
Greek. In speculative philosophy and the sciences, the
Romans made virtually no advance on early
achievements.
8.Which of the following statements about leading
Roman soldiers and statesmen is supported by
paragraphs 5 and 6?
A.They could read and write the Greek language.
B.They frequently wrote poetry and plays.
C.They focused their writing on military matters.
D.They wrote according to the philosophical laws of
the Greeks.
Yet it would be wrong to suggest that Rome was
somehow a junior partner in Greco-Roman civilization.
The Roman genius was projected into new spheres —
especially into those of law, military organization,
administration, and engineering. Moreover, the
tensions that arose within the Roman state produced
literary and artistic sensibilities of the highest order. It
was no accident that many leading Roman soldiers
and statesmen were writers of high caliber.
Modern attitudes to Roman civilization range from the infinitely impressed to the thoroughly disgusted. As
always, there are the power worshippers, especially among historians, who are predisposed to admire whatever is
strong, who feel more attracted to the might of Rome than to the subtlety of Greece. At the same time, there is
a solid body of opinion that dislikes Rome. ▌For many, Rome is at best the imitator and the continuator of
Greece on a larger scale. Greek civilization had quality; Rome, mere quantity. Greece was original; Rome,
derivative. Greece had style; Rome had money. Greece was the inventor; Rome, the research and development
division. Such indeed was the opinion of some of the more intellectual Romans. “Had the Greeks held novelty in
such disdain as we, ”asked Horace in his epistle, “what work of ancient date would now exist? ”
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
They esteem symbols of Roman power, such as the massive Colosseum.
10.Direction: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question worth 2 points. The Roman world drew its strength from several
important sources.
A. Numerous controls imposed by Roman rulers held its territory together.
B. The Roman military was organized differently from older military organizations.
C. Romans valued sea power as did the Latins, the original inhabitants of Rome.
D. Roman values were rooted in a strong attachment to the land and the stability of rural life.
E. Rome combined aspects of ancient Greek civilization with its own contributions in new areas.
F. Educated Romans modeled their own literature and philosophy on the ancient Greeks.
TPO7-3 Agriculture Iron and the Bantu Peoples
1.In paragraph 1, what does the author imply about
changes in the African environment during this time
period?
A.The climate was becoming milder, allowing for a
greater variety of crops to be grown.
B.Although periods of drying forced people south,
they returned once their food supply was secure.
C.Population growth along rivers and lakes was
dramatically decreasing the availability of fish.
D.A region that had once supported many people was
becoming a desert where few could survive.
There is evidence of agriculture in Africa prior to 3000
B.C. It may have developed independently, but many
scholars believe that the spread of agriculture and iron
throughout Africa linked it to the major centers of the
Near East and Mediterranean world. The drying up of
what is now the Sahara desert had pushed many
peoples to the south into sub-Sahara Africa. These
peoples settled at first in scattered
hunting-and-gathering bands, although in some places
near lakes and rivers, people who fished, with a more
secure food supply, lived in larger population
concentrations. Agriculture seems to have reached
these people from the Near East, since the first
domesticated crops were millets and sorghums whose
origins are not African but west Asian. Once the idea
of planting diffused, Africans began to develop their
own crops, such as certain varieties of rice, and they
demonstrated a continued receptiveness to new
imports. The proposed areas of the domestication of
African crops lie in a band that extends from Ethiopia
across southern Sudan to West Africa. Subsequently,
other crops, such as bananas, were introduced from
Southeast Asia.
2.According to paragraph 2, camels were important
because they
A.were the first domesticated animal to be introduced
to Africa
B.allowed the people of the West African savannahs to
carve out large empires
C.helped African peoples defend themselves against
Egyptian invaders
D.made it cheaper and easier to cross the Sahara
3.What function does paragraph 3 serve in the
organization of the passage as a whole?
A.It contrasts the development of iron technology in
West Asia and West Africa.
B.It discusses a non-agricultural contribution to Africa
from Asia.
C.It introduces evidence that a knowledge of copper
working reached Africa and Europe at the same time.
D.It compares the rates at which iron technology
developed in different parts of Africa4.The word “profound ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.fascinating
B.far-reaching
C.necessary
D.temporary
Livestock also came from outside Africa. Cattle were
introduced from Asia, as probably were domestic
sheep and goats. Horses were apparently introduced
by the Hyksos invaders of Egypt (1780-1560 B.C.) and
then spread across the Sudan to West Africa. Rock
paintings in the Sahara indicate that horses and
chariots were used to traverse the desert and that by
300-200 B.C., there were trade routes across the
Sahara. Horses were adopted by peoples of the West
African savannah, and later their powerful cavalry
forces allowed them to carve out large empires. Finally,
the camel was introduced around the first century A.D.
This was an important innovation, because the camel '
s abilities to thrive in harsh desert conditions and to
carry large loads cheaply made it an effective and
efficient means of transportation. The camel
transformed the desert from a barrier into a still
difficult, but more accessible, route of trade and
communication.
Iron came from West Asia, although its routes of
diffusion were somewhat different than those of
agriculture. Most of Africa presents a curious case in
which societies moved directly from a technology of
stone to iron without passing through the
intermediate stage of copper or bronze metallurgy,
although some early copper-working sites have been
found in West Africa. Knowledge of iron making
penetrated into the forest and savannahs of West
Africa at roughly the same time that iron making was
reaching Europe. Evidence of iron making has been
found in Nigeria, Ghana, and Mali.
This technological shift cause profound changes in the
complexity of African societies. Iron represented
power. In West Africa the blacksmith who made tools
and weapons had an important place in society, often
with special religious powers and functions. Iron hoes,
which made the land more productive, and iron
weapons, which made the warrior more powerful, had
symbolic meaning in a number of West Africa societies.
Those who knew the secrets of making iron gainedritual and sometimes political power.
5.The word “ritual”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.military
B.physical
C.ceremonial
D.permanent
6.According to paragraph 4, all of the following were
social effects of the new metal technology in Africa
EXCEPT:
A.Access to metal tools and weapons created greater
social equality.
B.Metal weapons increased the power of warriors.
C.Iron tools helped increase the food supply.
D.Technical knowledge gave religious power to its
holders.
7.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.While American iron makers developed the latest
furnaces, African iron makers continued using earlier
techniques.
B.Africans produced iron much earlier than Americans,
inventing technologically sophisticated heating
systems.
C.Iron making developed earlier in Africa than in the
Americas because of the ready availability of carbon
and iron ore.
D.Both Africa and the Americas developed the
capacity for making iron early, but African metallurgy
developed at a slower rate.
Unlike in the Americas, where metallurgy was a very
late and limited development, Africans had iron from
a relatively early date, developing ingenious furnaces
to produce the high heat needed for production and
to control the amount of air that reached the carbon
and iron ore necessary for making iron. Much of
Africa moved right into the Iron Age, taking the basic
technology and adapting it to local conditions and
resources.
8.Paragraph 6 mentions all of the following as possible
causes of the “Bantu explosion ”EXCEPT
A.superior weapons
B.better hunting skills
C.peaceful migration
D.increased population
The diffusion of agriculture and later of iron was
accompanied by a great movement of people who
may have carried these innovations. These people
probably originated in eastern Nigeria. Their migration
may have been set in motion by an increase in
population caused by a movement of peoples fleeing
the desiccation, or drying up, of the Sahara. They
spoke a language, proto-Bantu ( “Bantu”means“the
people”), which is the parent tongue of a language of
a large number of Bantu languages still spoken
throughout sub-Sahara Africa. Why and how these
people spread out into central and southern Africa
remains a mystery, but archaeologists believe that
their iron weapons allowed them to conquer their
hunting-gathering opponents, who still used stone
implements. Still, the process is uncertain, and
peaceful migration —or simply rapid demographic
growth—may have also caused the Bantu explosion.
The diffusion of agriculture and later of iron was accompanied by a great movement of people who may have
carried these innovations. These people probably originated in eastern Nigeria. Their migration may have been
set in motion by an increase in population caused by a movement of peoples fleeing the desiccation, or drying up,
of the Sahara. They spoke a language, proto-Bantu ( “Bantu”means“the people ”), which is the parent tongue
of a language of a large number of Bantu languages still spoken throughout sub-Sahara Africa. Why and how these
people spread out into central and southern Africa remains a mystery, but archaeologists believe that their iron
weapons allowed them to conquer their hunting-gathering opponents, who still used stone implements. Still,
the process is uncertain, and peaceful migration —or simply rapid demographic growth —may have also caused
the Bantu explosion. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
These people had a significant linguistic impact on the continent as well.
10.Direction: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Agriculture and iron working probably spread to Africa
from neighboring regions.
A. Once Africans developed their own crops, they no longer borrowed from other regions.
B. The harshness of the African climate meant that agriculture could not develop until after the introduction of
iron tools.
C. The use of livestock improved transportation and trade and allowed for new forms of political control.
D. As the Sahara expanded, the camel gained in importance, eventually coming to have religious significance.
E. The spread of iron working had far-reaching effects on social, economic, and political organization in Africa.
F. Today's Bantu-speaking peoples are descended from a technologically advanced people who spread throughout
Africa.
TPO8
TPO8-1 The Rise of Teotihuacán
1.In paragraph 1, each of the following is mentioned
as a feature of the city of Teotihuacán between A.D.
150 and 700 EXCEPT
A.regularly arranged streets
B.several administrative centers spread across the city
C.many manufacturing workshops
D.apartment complexes2.The word “ingenuity ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.ambition
B.sincerity
C.faith
D.cleverness
The city of Teotihuacán, which lay about 50 kilometers
northeast of modern-day Mexico City, began its
growth by 200-100 B.C. At its height, between about
A.D. 150 and 700, it probably had a population of
more than 125,000 people and covered at least 20
square kilometers. It had over 2,000 apartment
complexes, a great market, a large number of
industrial workshops, an administrative center, a
number of massive religious edifices, and a regular
grid pattern of streets and buildings. Clearly, much
planning and central control were involved in the
expansion and ordering of this great metropolis.
Moreover, the city had economic and perhaps
religious contacts with most parts of Mesoamerica
(modern Central America and Mexico).
How did this tremendous development take place,
and why did it happen in the Teotihuacán Valley?
Among the main factors are Teotihuacán 's geographic
location on a natural trade route to the south and east
of the Valley of Mexico, the obsidian resources in the
Teotihuacán Valley itself, and the valley 's potential for
extensive irrigation. The exact role of other factors is
much more difficult to pinpoint ―for instance,
Teotihuacán 's religious significance as a shrine, the
historical situation in and around the Valley of Mexico
toward the end of the first millennium B.C., theingenuity and foresightedness of Teotihuacán 's elite,
and, finally, the impact of natural disasters, such as
the volcanic eruptions of the late first millennium B.C.
3.Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 2 as a main factor in the development of
Teotihuacán?
A.The presence of obsidian in the Teotihuacán Valley
B.The potential for extensive irrigation of Teotihuacán
Valley lands
C.A long period of volcanic inactivity in the
Teotihuacán Valley
D.Teotihuacán 's location on a natural trade route
4.What can be inferred from paragraph 3 about
Cuicuilco prior to 200 B.C.?
A.It was a fairly small city until that date.
B.It was located outside the Valley of Mexico.
C.It emerged rapidly as an economical and political
center.
D.Its economy relied heavily on agriculture.
5.The word “predominant ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.most aggressive
B.most productive
C.principal
D.earliest
This last factor is at least circumstantially implicated in
Teotihuacán 's rise. Prior to 200 B.C., a number of
relatively small centers coexisted in and near the
Valley of Mexico. Around this time, the largest of
these centers, Cuicuilco, was seriously affected by a
volcanic eruption, with much of its agricultural land
covered by lava. With Cuicuilco eliminated as a
potential rival, any one of a number of relatively
modest towns might have emerged as a leading
economic and political power in Central Mexico. The
archaeological evidence clearly indicates, though, that
Teotihuacán was the center that did arise as thepredominant force in the area by the first century A.D.
6.Which of the following allowed Teotihuacán to have
“a competitive edge over its neighbors ”?
A.A well-exploited and readily available commodity
B.The presence of a highly stable elite class
C.Knowledge derived directly from the Olmecs about
the art of toolmaking
D.Scarce natural resources in nearby areas such as
those located in what are now the Guatemalan and
Mexican highlands
7.According to paragraph 4, what has recent research
on obsidian tools found at Olmec sites shown?
A.Obsidian 's value was understood only when
Teotihuacán became an important city.
B.The residents of Teotihuacán were sophisticated
toolmakers.
C.The residents of Teotihuacán traded obsidian with
the Olmecs as early as 400 B.C.
D.Some of the obsidian used by the Olmecs came
from the area around Teotihuacán.
It seems likely that Teotihuacán 's natural resources,
along with the city elite 's ability to recognize their
potential, gave the city a competitive edge over its
neighbors. The valley, like many other places in
Mexican and Guatemalan highlands, was rich in
obsidian. The hard volcanic stone was a resource that
had been in great demand for many years, at least
since the rise of the Olmecs (a people who flourished
between 1200 and 400 B.C.), and it apparently had a
secure market. Moreover, recent research on obsidian
tools found at Olmec sites has shown that some of the
obsidian obtained by the Olmecs originated near
Teotihuacán. Teotihuacán obsidian must have been
recognized as a valuable commodity for many
centuries before the great city arose.
Long-distance trade in obsidian probably gave the elite
residents of Teotihuacán access to a wide variety of
exotic good, as well as a relatively prosperous life.
Such success may have attracted immigrants to
Teotihuacán. In addition, Teotihuacán 's elite may
have consciously attempted to attract new inhabitants.
It is also probable that as early as 200 B.C. Teotihuacán
may have achieved some religious significance and its
shrine (or shrines) may have served as an additional
population magnet. Finally, the growing population
was probably fed by increasing the number and size of
irrigated fields.
8.In paragraph 6, the author discusses “The thriving
obsidian operation ”in order to
A.explain why manufacturing was the main industry of
Teotihuacán
B.give an example of an industry that took very little
time to develop in Teotihuacán
C.Illustrate how several factors influenced each other
to make Teotihuacán a powerful and wealthy city
D.explain how a successful industry can be a source of
wealth and a source of conflict at the same time
The picture of Teotihuacán that emerges is a classic
picture of positive feedback among obsidian mining
and working, trade, population growth, irrigation, andreligious tourism. The thriving obsidian operation , for
example, would necessitate more miners, additional
manufacturers of obsidian tools, and additional
traders to carry the goods to new markets. All this led
to increased wealth, which in turn would attract more
immigrants to Teotihuacán. The growing power of the
elite, who controlled the economy, would give them
the means to physically coerce people to move to
Teotihuacán and serve as additions to the labor force.
More irrigation works would have to be built to feed
the growing population, and this resulted in more
power and wealth for the elite.
The city of Teotihuacán, which lay about 50 kilometers northeast of modern-day Mexico City, began its growth by
200-100 B.C. At its height, between about A.D. 150 and 700, it probably had a population of more than 125,000
people and covered at least 20 square kilometers. It had over 2,000 apartment complexes, a great market, a
large number of industrial workshops, an administrative center, a number of massive religious edifices, and a
regular grid pattern of streets and buildings. Clearly, much planning and central control were involved in the
expansion and ordering of this great metropolis. Moreover, the city had economic and perhaps religious
contacts with most parts of Mesoamerica (modern Central America and Mexico). 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
In fact, artifacts and pottery from Teotihuacán have been discovered in sites as far away as the Mayan lowlands,
the Guatemalan highlands, northern Mexico, and the Gulf Coast of Mexico.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express that are not presented in the passage or are minor
ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Teotihuacán was a highly developed city in Mesoamerica that
reached its peak between about A.D. 150 and 700.
A. The number and sophistication of the architectural, administrative, commercial, and religious features of
Teotihuacan indicate the existence of centralized planning and control.
B. Teotihuacán may have developed its own specific local religion as a result of the cultural advances made
possible by the city 's great prosperity.
C. As a result of its large number of religious shrines, by the first century A.D., Teotihuacan become the most
influential religious center in all of Mesoamerica.
D. Several factors may account for Teotihuacán 's extraordinary development, including its location, rich natural
resources, irrigation potential, intelligent elite, and the misfortune of rival communities.
E. In many important areas, from the obsidian industry to religious tourism, Teotihuacán 's success and prosperity
typified the classic positive feedback cycle.
F. Although many immigrants settled in Teotihuacán between A.D.150 and 700, the increasing threat of coerced
labor discouraged further settlement and limited Teotihuacán 's population growth.
TPO8-2 Extinction of the Dinosaurs
Paleozoic Era 334 to 248 million years ago
Mesozoic Era 245 to 65 million years ago
—Triassic Period
—Jurassic Period
—Cretaceous Period
Cenozoic Era 65 million years ago to the present
Paleontologists have argued for a long time that the
demise of the dinosaurs was caused by climatic
alterations associated with slow changes in the
positions of continents and seas resulting from plate
tectonics. Off and on throughout the Cretaceous (the
last period of the Mesozoic era, during which
dinosaurs flourished), large shallow seas covered
extensive areas of the continents. Data from diverse
sources, including geochemical evidence preserved in
seafloor sediments, indicate that the Late Cretaceous
climate was milder than today's. The days were not
too hot, nor the nights too cold. The summers were
not too warm, nor the winters too frigid. The shallow
seas on the continents probably buffered the
temperature of the nearby air, keeping it relatively
constant.
At the end of the Cretaceous, the geological record
shows that these seaways retreated from the
continents back into the major ocean basins. No one
knows why. Over a period of about 100,000 years,
while the seas pulled back, climates around the world
became dramatically more extreme: warmer days,
cooler nights; hotter summers, colder winters.
Perhaps dinosaurs could not tolerate these extreme
temperature changes and became extinct.
1.Why does the author mention the survival of
“snakes, lizards, turtles, and crocodiles ” in
paragraph 3?
A.To argue that dinosaurs may have become extinct
because they were not cold-blooded animals
B.To question the adequacy of the hypothesis that
climatic change related to sea levels caused the
extinction of the dinosaurs
C.To present examples of animals that could maintain
a livable body temperature more easily than dinosaurs
D.To support a hypothesis that these animals were not
as sensitive to climate changes in the Cretaceous
period as they are today2.The word “cope” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.adapt
B.move
C.continue
D.compete
If true, though, why did cold-blooded animals such as
snakes, lizards, turtles, and crocodiles survive the
freezing winters and torrid summers? These animals
are at the mercy of the climate to maintain a livable
body temperature. It 's hard to understand why they
would not be affected, whereas dinosaurs were left
too crippled to cope , especially if, as some scientists
believe, dinosaurs were warm-blooded. Critics also
point out that the shallow seaways had retreated from
and advanced on the continents numerous times
during the Mesozoic, so why did the dinosaurs survive
the climatic changes associated with the earlier
fluctuations but not with this one? Although initially
appealing, the hypothesis of a simple climatic change
related to sea levels is insufficient to explain all the
data.
3.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? In correct choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The fossil record suggests that there was an abrupt
extinction of many plants and animals at the end of
the Mesozoic era.
B.Few fossils of the Mesozoic era have survived in the
rocks that mark the end of the Cretaceous.
C.Fossils from the Cretaceous period of the Mesozoic
up to the beginning of the Cenozoic era have been
removed from the layers of rock that surrounded
them.
D.Plants and animals from the Mesozoic era were
unable to survive in the Cenozoic era.
4.In paragraph 4, all the following questions are
answered EXCEPT:
A.Why is there a layer of clay between the rocks of the
Cretaceous and Cenozoic?
B.Why were scientists interested in determining how
long it took to deposit the layer of clay at the end of
the Cretaceous?
C.What was the effect of the surprising observation
scientists made?
D.Why did scientists want more information about the
dinosaur extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous?Dissatisfaction with conventional explanations for
dinosaur extinctions led to a surprising observation
that, in turn, has suggested a new hypothesis. Many
plants and animals disappear abruptly from the fossil
record as one moves from layers of rock
documenting the end of the Cretaceous up into rocks
representing the beginning of the Cenozoic (the era
after the Mesozoic). Between the last layer of
Cretaceous rock and the first layer of Cenozoic rock,
there is often a thin layer of clay. Scientists felt that
they could get an idea of how long the extinctions
took by determining how long it took to deposit this
one centimeter of clay and they thought they could
determine the time it took to deposit the clay by
determining the amount of the element iridium (Ir) it
contained.
5.The word “bombard ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.approach
B.strike
C.pass
D.circle
6.Paragraph 5 implies that a special explanation of Ir in
the boundary clay is needed because
A.the Ir in microscopic meteorites reaching Earth
during the Cretaceous period would have been
incorporated into Earth 's core
B.the Ir in the boundary clay was deposited much
more than a million years ago
C.the concentration of Ir in the boundary clay is higher
than in microscopic meteorites
D.the amount of Ir in the boundary clay is too great to
have come from microscopic meteorites during the
time the boundary clay was deposited7.The word “disruption ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.exhaustion
B.disturbance
C.modification
D.disappearance
8.Paragraph 6 mentions all of the following effects of
the hypothesized asteroid collision EXCEPT
A.a large dust cloud that blocked sunlight
B.an immediate drop in the surface temperatures of
the continents
C.an extreme decrease in rainfall on the continents
D.a long-term increase in global temperatures
Ir has not been common at Earth 's since the very
beginning of the planet 's history. Because it usually
exists in a metallic state, it was preferentially
incorporated in Earth 's core as the planet cooled and
consolidated. Ir is found in high concentrations in
some meteorites, in which the solar system 's original
chemical composition is preserved. Even today,microscopic meteorites continually bombard Earth,
falling on both land and sea. By measuring how many
of these meteorites fall to Earth over a given period of
time, scientists can estimate how long it might have
taken to deposit the observed amount of Ir in the
boundary clay. These calculations suggest that a
period of about one million years would have been
required. However, other reliable evidence suggests
that the deposition of the boundary clay could not
have taken one million years. So the unusually high
concentration of Ir seems to require a special
explanation.
In view of these facts, scientists hypothesized that a
single large asteroid, about 10 to 15 kilometers across,
collided with Earth, and the resulting fallout created
the boundary clay. Their calculations show that the
impact kicked up a dust cloud that cut off sunlight for
several months, inhibiting photosynthesis in plants;
decreased surface temperatures on continents to
below freezing; caused extreme episodes of acid rain;
and significantly raised long-term global temperaturesthrough the greenhouse effect. This disruption of food
chain and climate would have eradicated the
dinosaurs and other organisms in less than fifty years.
111Ir has not been common at Earth 's since the very beginning of the planet 's history. Because it usually exists in a
metallic state, it was preferentially incorporated in Earth 's core as the planet cooled and consolidated. Ir is found
in high concentrations in some meteorites, in which the solar system 's original chemical composition is preserved.
Even today, microscopic meteorites continually bombard Earth, falling on both land and sea. By measuring how
many of these meteorites fall to Earth over a given period of time, scientists can estimate how long it might have
taken to deposit the observed amount of Ir in the boundary clay. These calculations suggest that a period of
about one million years would have been required. However, other reliable evidence suggests that the
deposition of the boundary clay could not have taken one million years. So the unusually high concentration of
Ir seems to require a special explanation. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
Consequently, the idea that the Ir in the boundary clay came from microscopic meteorites cannot be accepted.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express that are not presented in the passage or are minor
ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. For a long time scientists have argued that the extinction of
the dinosaurs was related to climate change.
A. A simple climate change does not explain some important data related to the extinction of the dinosaurs at the
end of the Cretaceous.
B. The retreat of the seaways at the end of the Cretaceous has not been fully explained.
C. The abruptness of extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous and the high concentration of Ir found in clay
deposited at that time have fueled the development of a new hypothesis.
D. Extreme changes in daily and seasonal climates preceded the retreat of the seas back into the major ocean
basins.
E. Some scientists hypothesize that the extinction of the dinosaurs resulted from the effects of an asteroid
collision with Earth.
F. Boundary clay layers like the one between the Mesozoic and Cenozoic are used by scientists to determine the
rate at which an extinct species declined.
TPO8-3 Running Water on Mars
1.The word “merge”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.expand
B.separate
C.straighten out
D.combine
2.What does the discussion in paragraph 1 of runoff
channels in the southern highlands suggest about
Mars?
A.The atmosphere of Mars was once thinner than it is
today.
B.Large amounts of rain once fell on parts of Mars.
C.The river systems of Mars were once more extensive
than Earth's.
D.The rivers of Mars began to dry up about 4 billion
years ago.
3.The word “relics”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.remains
B.sites
C.requirements
D.sources
4.According to paragraph 2, all of the following are
true of the outflow channels on Mars EXCEPT:
A.They formed at around the same time that volcanic
activity was occurring on the northern plains.
B.They are found only on certain parts of the Martian
surface.
C.They sometimes empty onto what appear to have
once been the wet sands of tidal beaches.
D.They are thought to have carried water northward
from the equatorial regions.
Photographic evidence suggests that liquid water once
existed in great quantity on the surface of Mars. Two
types of flow features are seen: runoff channels and
outflow channels. Runoff channels are found in the
southern highlands. These flow features are extensive
systems—sometimes hundreds of kilometers in total
length—of interconnecting, twisting channels thatseem to merge into larger, wider channels. They bear
a strong resemblance to river systems on Earth, and
geologists think that they are dried-up beds of
long-gone rivers that once carried rainfall on Mars
from the mountains down into the valleys. Runoff
channels on Mars speak of a time 4 billion years ago
(the age of the Martian highlands), when the
atmosphere was thicker, the surface warmer, and
liquid water widespread.
Outflow channels are probably relics of catastrophic
flooding on Mars long ago. They appear only in
equatorial regions and generally do not form extensive
interconnected networks. Instead, they are probably
the paths taken by huge volumes of water draining
from the southern highlands into the northern plains.
The onrushing water arising from these flash floods
likely also formed the odd teardrop-shaped “islands”
(resembling the miniature versions seen in the wet
sand of our beaches at low tide) that have been found
on the plains close to the ends of the outflow
channels. Judging from the width and depth of the
channels, the flow rates must have been truly
enormous—perhaps as much as a hundred times
greater than the 105 tons per second carried by the
great Amazon river. Flooding shaped the outflow
channels approximately 3 billion years ago, about the
same times as the northern volcanic plains formed.
5.All of the following questions about geological
features on Mars are answered in paragraph 3 EXCEPT:
A.What are some regions of Mars that may have once
been covered with an ocean?
B.Where do mission scientists believe that the river
forming the delta emptied?
C.Approximately how many craters on Mars do
mission scientists believe may once have been lakes
filled with water?
D.During what period of Mars' history do some
scientists think it may have had large bodies of water?
6..
According to paragraph 3, images of Mars' surface
have been interpreted as support for the idea that
A.the polar regions of Mars were once more extensive
than they are now
B.a large part of the northern lowlands may once have
been under water
C.deltas were once a common feature of the Martian
landscape
D.the shape of the Hellas Basin has changed
considerably over time
Some scientists speculate that Mars may have enjoyed
an extended early Period during which rivers, lakes,
and perhaps even oceans adorned its surface. A 2003
Mars Global Surveyor image shows what mission
specialists think may be a delta —a fan-shaped
network of channels and sediments where a river
once flowed into a larger body of water, in this case a
lake filling a crater in the southern highlands. Other
researchers go even further, suggesting that the data
provide evidence for large open expenses of water on
the early Martian surface. A computer-generated view
of the Martian north polar region shows the extent of
what may have been an ancient ocean covering much
of the northern lowlands. The Hellas Basin, which
measures some 3,000 kilometers across and has a
floor that lies nearly 9 kilometers below the basin 's
rim, is another candidate for an ancient Martian sea.
7.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.But detractors argue that geological activity may be
responsible for the water associated with the terraces.
B.But detractors argue that the terraces may have
been formed by geological activity rather than by the
presence of water.
C.But detractors argue that the terraces may be
related to geological forces in the Northern
Hemisphere of Mars, rather than to Martian water in
the south.
D.But detractors argue that geological forces
depressed the Northern Hemisphere so far below the
level of the south that the terraces could not have
been formed by water.
8.According to paragraph 4, what do the 2003 Global
Surveyor data suggest about Mars?
A.Ancient oceans on Mars contained only small
amounts of carbon.
B.The climate of Mars may not have been suitable for
the formation of large bodies of water.
C.Liquid water may have existed on some parts of
Mars' surface for long periods of time.
D.The ancient oceans that formed on Mars dried up
during periods of cold, dry weather.
These ideas remain controversial. Proponents point to
features such as the terraced “beaches”shown in
one image, which could conceivably have been left
behind as a lake or ocean evaporated and the
shoreline receded. But detractors maintain that the
terraces could also have been created by geological
activity, perhaps related to the geologic forces that
depressed the Northern Hemisphere far below the
level of the south, in which case they have nothing
whatever to do with Martian water. Furthermore,
Mars Global Surveyor data released in 2003 seem to
indicate that the Martian surface contains too few
carbonate rock layers —layers containing compounds
of carbon and oxygen —that should have been formed
in abundance in an ancient ocean. Their absence
supports the picture of a cold, dry Mars that never
experienced the extended mild period required to
form lakes and oceans. However, more recent data
imply that at least some parts of the planet did in fact
experience long periods in the past during which
liquid water existed on the surface.
Aside from some small-scale gullies (channels) found
since 2000, which are inconclusive, astronomers have
no direct evidence for liquid water anywhere on the
surface of Mars today, and the amount of water vapor
in the Martian atmosphere is tiny. Yet even settingaside the unproven hints of ancient oceans, the extent
of the outflow channels suggests that a huge total
volume of water existed on Mars in the past. Where
did all the water go? The answer may be that virtually
all the water on Mars is now locked in the permafrost
layer under the surface, with more contained in the
planet's polar caps.
115Outflow channels are probably relics of catastrophic flooding on Mars long ago. They appear only in equatorial
regions and generally do not form extensive interconnected networks. Instead, they are probably the paths
taken by huge volumes of water draining from the southern highlands into the northern plains. The onrushing
water arising from these flash floods likely also formed the odd teardrop-shaped “islands” (resembling the
miniature versions seen in the wet sand of our beaches at low tide) that have been found on the plains close to
the ends of the outflow channels. Judging from the width and depth of the channels, the flow rates must have
been truly enormous—perhaps as much as a hundred times greater than the 105 tons per second carried by the
great Amazon river. Flooding shaped the outflow channels approximately 3 billion years ago, about the same times
as the northern volcanic plains formed.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
These landscape features differ from runoff channels in a number of ways.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express that are not presented in the passage or are minor
ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. There is much debate concerning whether Mars once had
water.
A. Mars' runoff and outflow channels are large-scale, distinctive features that suggest that large quantities of
liquid water once flowed on Mars.
B. Although some researchers claim that Mars may once have had oceans, others dispute this, pointing to an
absence of evidence or offering alternative interpretations of evidence.
C. Various types of images have been used to demonstrate that most of Martian surface contains evidence of
flowing water.
D. The runoff and outflow channels of Mars apparently carried a higher volume of water and formed more
extensive networks than do Earth's river systems.
E. There is very little evidence of liquid water on Mars today, and it is assumed that all the water that once existed
on the planet is frozen beneath its surface.
F. While numerous gullies have been discovered on Mars since 2000, many astronomers dismiss them as evidence
that Mars once had liquid water.
TPO9
TPO9-1 Conizing the Americas via the Northwest Coast
1. According to paragraph 1, the theory that people
first migrated to the Americans by way of an ice-free
corridor was seriously called into question by
A.paleoecologist Glen MacDonald's argument that the
original migration occurred much later than had
previously been believed
B.the demonstration that certain previously accepted
radiocarbon dates were incorrect
C.evidence that the continental ice began its final
retreat much later than had previously been believed
D.research showing that the ice-free corridor was not
as long lasting as had been widely assumed
It has long been
accepted that the
Americas were
colonized by a
migration of
peoples from Asia,
slowly traveling
across a land bridge
called Beringia (now
the Bering Straitbetween northeastern Asia and Alaska) during the last
Ice Age. The first water craft theory about this
migration was that around 11,000-12,000 years ago
there was an ice-free corridor stretching from eastern
Beringia to the areas of North America south of the
great northern glaciers. It was this midcontinental
corridor between two massive ice sheets–the
Laurentide to the east and the Cordilleran to the
west–that enabled the southward migration. But
belief in this ice-free corridor began to crumble when
paleoecologist Glen MacDonald demonstrated that
some of the most important radiocarbon dates used
to support the existence of an ice-free corridor were
incorrect. He persuasively argued that such an ice-free
corridor did not exist until much later, when the
continental ice began its final retreat.
2.Paragraph 2 begins by presenting a theory and then
goes on to
A.discuss why the theory was rapidly accepted but
then rejected
B.present the evidence on which the theory was
based
C.cite evidence that now shows that the theory is
incorrect
D.explain why the theory was not initially considered
plausible
3.Paragraph 2 supports the idea that, before the
1970s, most archaeologists held which of the
following views about the earliest people to reach the
Americas?
A.They could not have sailed directly from Beringia to
Alaska and then southward because, it was thought,
glacial ice covered the entire coastal region.
B.They were not aware that the climate would
continue to become milder.
C.They would have had no interest in migrating
southward from Beringia until after the continental
glaciers had begun to melt.
D.They lacked the navigational skills and appropriate
boats needed long-distance trips.
Support is growing for the alternative theory that
people using watercraft, possibly skin boats, moved
southward from Beringia along the Gulf of Alaska and
then southward along the Northwest coast of North
America possibly as early as 16,000 years ago. This
route would have enabled humans to enter southern
areas of the Americas prior to the melting of the
continental glaciers. Until the early 1970s,most
archaeologists did not consider the coast a possible
migration route into the Americas because geologists
originally believed that during the last Ice Age the
entire Northwest Coast was covered by glacial ice. It
had been assumed that the ice extended westward
from the Alaskan/Canadian mountains to the very
edge of the continental shelf, the flat, submerged part
of the continent that extends into the ocean. This
would have created a barrier of ice extending from
the Alaska Peninsula, through the Gulf of Alaska and
southward along the Northwest Coast of north
America to what is today the state of Washington.
The most influential proponent of the coastal
migration route has been Canadian archaeologist Knut
Fladmark. He theorized that with the use of watercraft,
people gradually colonized unglaciated refuges and
areas along the continental shelf exposed by the
lower sea level. Fladmark's hypothesis received
additional support form from the fact that the
greatest diversity in native American languages occurs
along the west coast of the Americas, suggesting that
this region has been settled the longest.
4.The author's purpose in paragraph 4 is to
A.indicate that a number of recent geologic studies
seem to provide support for the coastal hypothesis
B.indicate that coastal and inland migrations may
have happened simultaneously
C.explain why humans may have reached America's
northwest coast before animals and plants did
D.show that the coastal hypothesis may explain how
people first reached Alaska but it cannot explain how
people reached areas like modern British Columbia
and Washington State
5.The word “Vast” in the passage is closest in meaning
to
A.Frozen
B.Various
C.Isolated
D.Huge
6. According to paragraph 5, the discovery of the
remains of large land animals supports the coastal
hypothesis by providing evidence that
A.humans were changing their hunting techniques to
adapt to coastal rather than inland environments
B.animals had migrated from the inland to the coasts,
an indication that a midcontinental ice-free corridor
was actually implausible
C.humans probably would have been able to find
enough resources along the coastal corridor
D.the continental shelf was still exposed by lower sea
levels during the period when the southward
migration of people began
Paragraph 4: More recent geologic studies
documented deglaciation and the existence of ice-free
areas throughout major coastal areas of British
Columbia, Canada, by 13,000 years ago. Research now
indicates that sizable areas of southeastern Alaska
along the inner continental shelf were not covered by
ice toward the end of the last Ice Age. One study
suggests that except for a 250-mile coastal area
between southwestern British Columbia and
Washington State, the Northwest Coast of North
America was largely free of ice by approximately16,000 years ago. Vast areas along the coast may have
been deglaciated beginning around 16,000 years ago,
possibly providing a coastal corridor for the
movement of plants, animals, and humans sometime
between 13,000 and 14,000 years ago.
The coastal hypothesis has gained increasing support
in recent years because the remains of large land
animals, such as caribou and brown bears, have been
found in southeastern Alaska dating between 10,000
and 12,500 years ago. This is the time period in which
most scientists formerly believed the area to beinhospitable for humans. It has been suggested that if
the environment were capable of supporting breeding
populations of bears, there would have been enough
food resources to support humans. Fladmark and
other believe that the first human colonization of
America occurred by boat along the Northwest Coast
during the very late Ice Age, possibly as early as
14,000 years ago. The most recent geologic evidence
indicates that it may have been possible for people to
colonize ice-free regions along the continental shelf
that were still exposed by the lower sea level
between13,000 and 14,000 years ago.
7. The word “inhospitable”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.not familiar
B.not suitable
C.not dangerous
D.not reachable8.The word “impetus” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.chance
B.protection
C.possibility
D.incentive
The coastal hypothesis suggests an economy based on
marine mammal hunting, saltwater fishing, shellfish
gathering, and the use of watercraft. Because of the
barrier of ice to the east, the Pacific Ocean to the west,
and populated areas to the north, there may havebeen a greater impetus for people to move in a
southerly direction.
【Paragraph 1 】It has long been accepted that the Americas were colonized by a migration of peoples from Asia,
slowly traveling across a land bridge called Beringia (now the Bering Strait between northeastern Asia and Alaska)
during the last Ice Age. The first water craft theory about the migration was that around 11,000-12,000 years
ago there was an ice-free corridor stretching from eastern Beringia to the areas of North America south of the
great northern glaciers. It was the midcontinental corridor between two massive ice sheets-the Laurentide to the
west-that enabled the southward migration. But belief in this ice-free corridor began to crumble when
paleoecologist Glen MacDonald demonstrated that some of the most important radiocarbon dates used to
support the existence of an ice-free corridor were incorrect. He persuasively argued that such an ice-free
corridor did not exist until much later, when the continental ice began its final retreat. 
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Moreover, other evidence suggests that even if an ice-free corridor did exist, it would have lacked the resources
needed for human colonization.
Where could the sentence best fit?
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Recent evidence favors a rival to the
long-standing theory that the Americas were colonized 11,000-12,000 years ago by people migrating south from
Beringia along a midcontinental ice-free corridor.
A. Evidence that an ice-free corridor between two ice sheets developed when the continental ice first began to
melt came primarily from radiocarbon dating.
B. There is growing support for the theory that migration took place much earlier, by sea, following a coastal
route along Alaska and down the northwest coast.
C. Recent geologic evidence indicates that contrary to what had been believed, substantial areas along the coast
were free of ice as early as 16,000 years ago.
D. Research now indicates that the parts of the inner continental shelf that remained covered with ice were
colonized by a variety of early human groups well adapted to living in extremely cold environments.
E. There is evidence suggesting that areas along the coast may have contained enough food resources between
13,000 and 14,000 years ago to have made human colonization possible.
F. Even though the northern part of the continent allowed for a more varied economy, several early human
groups quickly moved south.
TPO9-2 Reflection in Teaching
1.According to paragraph 1, it was believed that
reflection could help teachers
A.understand intellectual principles of teaching
B.strengthen their intellectual connection to their
work
C.use scientific fact to improve discipline and teaching
D.adopt a more disciplined approach to teaching2. The word “flourish ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.continue
B.occur
C.succeed
D.apply
3. All of the following are mentioned about the
experimental strategy described in paragraph 2
EXCEPT :
A.It was designed so that teachers would eventually
reflect without help from others.
B.It was used by a group of teachers over a period of
years.
C.It involved having teachers take part in discussions
of classroom events.
D.It involved having teachers record in writing their
reflections about teaching.
Paragraph 1: Teachers, it is thought, benefit from the
practice of reflection, the conscious act of thinking
deeply about and carefully examining the interactions
and events within their own classrooms. Educators T.
Wildman and J. Niles (1987) describe a scheme for
developing reflective practice in experienced teachers.
This was justified by the view that reflective practice
could help teachers to feel more intellectually
involved in their role and work in teaching and enable
them to cope with the paucity of scientific fact and
the uncertainty of knowledge in the discipline of
teaching.
Paragraph 2: Wildman and Niles were particularly
interested in investigating the conditions under whichreflection might flourish –a subject on which there is
little guidance in the literature. They designed an
experimental strategy for a group of teachers in
Virginia and worked with 40 practicing teachers over
several years. They were concerned that many would
be “drawn to these new, refreshing”conceptions of
teaching only to find that the void between the
abstractions and the realities of teacher reflection is
too great to bridge. Reflection on a complex task such
as teaching is not easy. The teachers were taken
through a program of talking about teaching events,
moving on to reflecting about specific issues in a
supported, and later an independent, manner.
4. The word “objective ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.unbiased
B.positive
C.systematic
D.thorough
5. According to paragraph 3, what did the teachers
working with Wildman and Niles often fail to do when
they attempted to practice reflection?
A.Correctly calculate the amount of time needed for
reflection.
B.Provide sufficiently detailed descriptions of the
methods they used to help them reflect.
C.Examine thoughtfully the possible causes of events
in their classrooms.
D.Establish realistic goals for themselves in practicing
reflection.
6. How is paragraph 4 related to other aspects of the
discussion of reflection in the passage?
A.It describes and comments on steps taken to
overcome problems identified earlier in the passage.
B.It challenges the earlier claim that teachers rarely
have the time to think about their own or others'
teaching.
C.It identifies advantages gained by teachers who
followed the training program described earlier in the
passage.
D.It explains the process used to define the principles
discussed later in the passage.
Paragraph 3: Wildman and Niles observed that
systematic reflection on teaching required a sound
ability to understand classroom events in an objective
manner. They describe the initial understanding in the
teachers with whom they were working as being
“utilitarian …and not rich or detailed enough to drive
systematic reflection.”Teachers rarely have the time
or opportunities to view their own or the teaching of
others in an objective manner. Further observation
revealed the tendency of teachers to evaluate events
rather than review the contributory factors in a
considered manner by, in effect, standing outside the
situation.
Paragraph 4: Helping this group of teachers to revise
their thinking about classroom events became central.
This process took time and patience and effective
trainers. The researchers estimate that the initial
training of the teachers to view events objectively
took between 20 and 30 hours, with the same number
of hours again being required to practice the skills of
reflection.
7. According to paragraph 6, teachers may be
discouraged from reflecting because
A.it is not generally supported by teacher educators
B.the benefits of reflection may not be apparent
immediately
B.it is impossible to teach and reflect on one's
teaching at the same time
D.they have often failed in their attempts to become
reflective practitioners
8. Which of the sentences below expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information
A.The practice of being reflective is no longer simply a
habit among teachers but something that is externally
motivated.
B.Most teachers need to explore ways to form the
habit of reflection even when no external motivation
exists.
C.Many aspects of the motivation to reflect have not
been studied, including the comparative benefits of
Wildman and Niles identify three principles thatfacilitate reflective practice in a teaching situation.
The first is support from administrators in an
education system, enabling teachers to understand
the requirements of reflective practice and how it
relates to teaching students. The second is the
availability of sufficient time and space. The teachers
in the program described how they found it difficult to
put aside the immediate demands of others in order
to give themselves the time they needed to develop
their reflective skills. The third is the development of a
collaborative environment with support from other
teachers. Support and encouragement were also
required to help teachers in the program cope with
aspects of their professional life with which they were
not comfortable. Wildman and Niles make a summary
comment: “Perhaps the most important thing we
learned is the idea of the
teacher-as-reflective-practitioner will not happensimply because it is a good or even compelling idea.”
Paragraph 6: The work of Wildman and Niles suggests
the importance of recognizing some of the difficulties
of instituting reflective practice. Others have noted
this, making a similar point about the teaching
profession's cultural inhibitions about reflective
practice. Zeichner and Liston (1987) point out the
inconsistency between the role of the teacher as a
(reflective) professional decision maker and the more
usual role of the teacher as a technician, putting into
practice the ideas of theirs. More basic than the
cultural issues is the matter of motivation. Becoming a
reflective practitioner requires extra work (Jaworski,
1993) and has only vaguely defined goals with,
perhaps, little initially perceivable reward and the
threat of vulnerability. Few have directly questioned
what might lead a teacher to want to become
reflective. Apparently, the most obvious reason for
teachers to work toward reflective practice is that
teacher educators think it is a good thing. There
appear to be many unexplored matters about the
motivation to reflect –for example, the value of
externally motivated reflection as opposed to that of
teachers who might reflect by habit.
externally motivated and habitual reflection among
124teachers.
D.There has not been enough exploration of why
teachers practice reflection as a habit with or without
external motivation.【Paragraph 4 】Helping this group of teachers to revise their thinking about classroom events became central.
This process took time and patience and effective trainers. The researchers estimate that the initial training
of the teachers to view events objectively took between 20 and 30 hours, with the same number of hours again
being required to practice the skills of reflection.
【Paragraph 5 】 Wildman and Niles identify three principles that facilitate reflective practice in a teaching
situation. The first is support from administrators in an education system, enabling teachers to understand the
requirements of reflective practice and how it relates to teaching students. The second is the availability of
sufficient time and space. The teachers in the program described how they found it difficult to put aside the
immediate demands of others in order to give themselves the time they needed to develop their reflective skills.
The third is the development of a collaborative environment with support from other teachers. Support and
encouragement were also required to help teachers in the program cope with aspects of their professional life
with which they were not comfortable. Wildman and Niles make a summary comment: “Perhaps the most
important thing we learned is the idea of the teacher-as-reflective-practitioner will not happen simply because it
is a good or even compelling idea.”
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
However, changing teachers'thinking about reflection will not succeed unless there is support for reflection in
the teaching environment.
Where could the sentence best fit?
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Wildman and Niles have conducted research on reflection in teaching
A.Through their work with Virginia teachers, Wildman and Niles proved conclusively that reflection, though
difficult, benefits both teachers and students.
B.Wildman and Niles found that considerable training and practice are required to understand classroom events
and develop the skills involved in reflection.
C.Wildman and Niles identified three principles that teachers can use to help themselves cope with problems
that may arise as a result of reflection.
D.Wildman and Niles concluded that teachers need sufficient resources as well as the cooperation and
encouragement of others to practice reflection.
E.There are numerous obstacles to implementing reflection in schools and insufficient understanding of why
teachers might want to reflect.
F.Whether teachers can overcome the difficulties involved in reflection may depend on the nature and intensity
of their motivation to reflect.
TPO9-3 The Arrival of Plant Life in Hawaii
1. It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that the fungi in
lichens benefit from their symbiotic relationship with
algae in what way?
A.The algae help the fungi meet some of their energy
needs.
B.The algae protect the fungi from the Sun's radiation.
C.The algae provide the fungi with greater space for
absorbing water.
D.The fungi produce less waste in the presence of
algae.
2. Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Some of the earliest important examples of
symbiosis—the close cooperation of two or more
living things—occur in island communities.
B.Symbiosis—the close cooperation of pairs or small
groups of living organisms—is especially important in
these island environments.
C.The first organisms on these islands worked
together closely in a relationship known as symbiosis,
which is particularly important on islands.
D.It is significant to note that organisms in the
beginning stages of the development of island life
cannot survive without close cooperation
Paragraph 1: When the Hawaiian Islands emerged
from the sea as volcanoes, starting about five million
years ago, they were far removed from other
landmasses. Then, as blazing sunshine alternated with
drenching rains, the harsh, barren surfaces of the
black rocks slowly began to soften. Winds brought a
variety of life-forms.
Paragraph 2: Spores light enough to float on the
breezes were carried thousands of miles from more
ancient lands and deposited at random across the
bare mountain flanks. A few of these spores found a
toehold on the dark, forbidding rocks and grew and
began to work their transformation upon the land.
Lichens were probably the first successful flora. These
are not single individual plants; each one is a
symbiotic combination of an alga and a fungus. The
algae capture the sun's energy by photosynthesis and
store it in organic molecules. The fungi absorb
moisture and mineral salts from the rocks, passingthese on in waste products that nourish algae. It is
significant that the earliest living thing that built
communities on these islands are examples of
symbiosis, a phenomenon that depends upon the
close cooperation of two or more forms of life and a
principle that is very important in island communities.
3. The word “propagate ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.multiply
B.emerge
C.live
D.evolve
4. According to paragraph 3, what was the
relationship between lichens and ferns in the
development of plant life on Hawaii?
A.Ferns were able to grow because lichens created
suitable soil.
B.The decomposition of ferns produced minerals that
were used by lichens.
C.Lichens and ferns competed to grow in the same
rocky environments.
D.Lichens and ferns were typically found together in
volcanic areas.
5. The word “This ” in the passage refers to
A.the spread of ferns and mosses in Hawaii
B.the creation of the Hawaiian Islands
C.the evolution of ferns
D.the development of plants that produce seeds6. The word “dormant ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.hidden
B.inactive
C.underground
D.preserved
Paragraph3: Lichens helped to speed the
decomposition of the hard rock surfaces, preparing a
soft bed of soil that was abundantly supplied with
minerals that had been carried in the molten rock
from the bowels of Earth. Now, other forms of life
could take hold: ferns and mosses (two of the most
ancient types of land plants) that flourish even in rockcrevices. These plants propagate by producing
spores–tiny fertilized cells that contain all the
instructions for making a new plant–but the spore are
unprotected by any outer coating and carry no supply
of nutrient. Vast numbers of them fall on the ground
beneath the mother plants. Sometimes they are
carried farther afield by water or by wind. But only
those few spores that settle down in very favorable
locations can start new life; the vast majority fall on
barren ground. By force of sheer numbers, however,
the mosses and ferns reached Hawaii, survived, and
multiplied. Some species developed great size,
becoming tree ferns that even now grow in the
Hawaiian forests.
Paragraph 4: Many millions of years after ferns
evolved (but long before the Hawaiian Islands were
born from the sea), another kind of flora evolved on Earth: the seed-bearing plants. This was a wonderful
biological invention. The seed has an outer coating
that surrounds the genetic material of the new plant,
and inside this covering is a concentrated supply of
nutrients. Thus the seed's chances of survival are
greatly enhanced over those of the naked spore. One
type of seed-bearing plant, the angiosperm, includes
all forms of blooming vegetation. In the angiosperm
the seeds are wrapped in an additional layer of
covering. Some of these coats are hard–like the shell
of a nut–for extra protection. Some are soft and
tempting, like a peach or a cherry. In some
angiosperms the seeds are equipped with gossamer
wings, like the dandelion and milkweed seeds. These
new characteristics offered better ways for the seed
to move to new habitats. They could travel through
7. According to paragraph 5, a major reason that
coconuts can establish themselves in distant locations
is that their seeds can
A.survive long exposure to heat on island beaches
B.float and survive for long periods in ocean water
C.use saltwater for maintenance and growth
D.maintain hard, protective coats even after growing
roots
8. According to the passage, which of the following
characteristics do spores and seeds have in common?
A.They may be surrounded by several layers of
covering.
B.They are produced by flowering plants.
C.They may be spread by wind.
D.They are able to grow in barren soilsthe air, float in water, and lie dormant for many
months.
Paragraph5: Plants with large, buoyant seeds—like
coconuts—drift on ocean currents and are washed up
on the shores. Remarkably resistant to the vicissitudes
of ocean travel, they can survive prolonged immersion
in saltwater when they come to rest on warm beaches
and the conditions are favorable, the seed coats
soften. Nourished by their imported supply of
nutrients, the young plants push out their roots and
establish their place in the sun.
By means of these seeds, plants spread more widely
to new locations, even to isolated islands like the
Hawaiian archipelago, which lies more than 2,000
miles west of California and 3,500 miles east of Japan.
The seeds of grasses, flowers, and blooming trees
made the long trips to these islands. (Grasses are
simple forms of angiosperms that bear their
encapsulated seeds on long stalks.) In a surprisingly
short time, angiosperms filled many of the land areas
on Hawaii that had been bare.【Paragraph 3 】Lichens helped to speed the decomposition of the hard rock surfaces, preparing a soft bed of soil
that was abundantly supplied with minerals that had been carried in the molten rock from the bowels of Earth.
Now, other forms of life could take hold: ferns and mosses (two of the most ancient types of land plants) that
flourish even in rock crevices. These plants propagate by producing spores–tiny fertilized cells that contain all
the instructions for making a new plant–but the spore are unprotected by any outer coating and carry no supply
of nutrient. Vast numbers of them fall on the ground beneath the mother plants. Sometimes they are
carried farther afield by water or by wind. But only those few spores that settle down in very favorable
locations can start new life; the vast majority fall on barren ground. By force of sheer numbers, however, the
mosses and ferns reached Hawaii, survived, and multiplied. Some species developed great size, becoming tree
ferns that even now grow in the Hawaiian forests.
13. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
So since the chances of survival for any individual spore are small, the plants have to produce many spores in
order to propagate.
Where could the sentence best fit?
14.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
After the formation of the Hawaiian Islands, much time passed before conditions were suitable for plant life.
Answers Choices
○Algae are classified as symbiotic because they produce energy through the process of photosynthesis.
○The first successful plants on Hawaii were probably lichens, which consist of algae and fungi living in a
symbiotic relationship.
○Lichens helped create favorable conditions for the growth of spore-producing plants such as ferns and
mosses.
○Seed-bearing plants evolved much later than spore-producing plants, but both types of plants had evolved
well before the formation of the Hawaiian Islands.
○Unlike spores, seeds must move to new habitats in order to have a strong chance of survival and growth.
○Seed-bearing plants arrived and spread quickly in Hawaii, thanks to characteristics that increased their
seeds'ability to survive and to move to different areas.
TPO10
TPO10-1 Chinese Pottery
1.The word “status”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.origin
B.importance
C.quality
D.design
China has one of the world's oldest continuous
civilizations—despite invasions and occasional foreign
rule. A country as vast as China with so long-lasting a
civilization has a complex social and visual history,
within which pottery and porcelain play a major role.
The function and status of ceramics in China varied
from dynasty to dynasty, so they may be utilitarian,
burial, trade-collectors', or even ritual objects,
according to their quality and the era in which they
were made. The ceramics fall into three broad
types—earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain—for
vessels, architectural items such as roof tiles, and
modeled objects and figures. In addition, there was an
important group of sculptures made for religious use,
the majority of which were produced in earthenware.
2.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.While stonewares and porcelains are found
throughout most historical periods, religious sculpture
is limited to the ancient period.
B.Religious sculpture was created in most periods, but
its history is less clear than that of stonewares or
porcelains because some old forms continued to be
used even when new ones were developed.
C.While stonewares and porcelains changed
throughout history, religious sculpture remained
uniform in form and use.
D.The historical development of religious sculpture is
relatively unclear because religious sculptures
sometimes resemble earthenware architectural
ornaments.
3.Paragraph 3 supports all of the following concerning
the history of the ceramic industry in China EXCEPT:
A.The earliest high-fired ceramics were of poor quality.
B.Ceramics produced during the Tang and Ming
dynasties sometimes incorporated multiple colors.
C.Earthenware ceramics were produced in China
before stonewares were.
D.The Song dynasty period was notable for the
production of high quality porcelain ceramics.
The earliest ceramics were fired to earthenware
temperatures, but as early as the fifteenth century
B.C., high-temperature stonewares were being made
with glazed surfaces. During the Six Dynasties period
(AD 265-589), kilns in north China were producing
high-fired ceramics of good quality. Whitewares
produced in Hebei and Henan provinces from theseventh to the tenth centuries evolved into the highly
prized porcelains of the Song dynasty (AD. 960-1279),
long regarded as one of the high points in the historyof China's ceramic industry. The tradition of religious
sculpture extends over most historical periods but is
less clearly delineated than that of stonewares or
porcelains, for it embraces the old custom of
earthenware burial ceramics with later religious
images and architectural ornament.
Ceramic products
also include lead-glazed tomb models of the Han
dynasty, three-color lead-glazed vessels and figures of
the Tang dynasty, and Ming three-color temple
ornaments, in which the motifs were outlined in a
raised trail of slip—as well as the many burial ceramics
produced in imitation of vessels made in materials of
higher intrinsic value.
4.The word “ instigated ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to A.improved
B.investigated
C.narrowed
D.caused
5.According to paragraph 4, one consequence of the
trade of Chinese ceramics was
A.the transfer of a distinctive blue pigment from China
to the Middle East
B.an immediate change from earthenware production
to porcelain production in European countries
C.Chinese production of wares made for the European
market
D.a decreased number of porcelain vessels available
on the European market
6.Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 5
as being symbolically represented on Chinese ceramics?
A.Chinese rulers
B.love of homeland
C.loyally to friends
D.success in trade
Trade between the West and the settled and
prosperous Chinese dynasties introduced new forms
and different technologies. One of the most
far-reaching examples is the impact of the fine
ninth-century AD. Chinese porcelain wares imported
into the Arab world. So admired were these pieces
that they encouraged the development of
earthenware made in imitation of porcelainand instigated research into the method of their
manufacture. From the Middle East the Chinese
acquired a blue pigment—a purified form of cobalt
oxide unobtainable at that time in China—that
contained only a low level of manganese. Cobalt ores
found in China have a high manganese content, which
produces a more muted blue-gray color. In the
seventeenth century, the trading activities of the
Dutch East India Company resulted in vast quantities
of decorated Chinese porcelain being brought to
Europe, which stimulated and influenced the work of
a wide variety of wares, notably Delft. The Chinese
themselves adapted many specific vessel forms from
the West, such as bottles with long spouts, and
designed a range of decorative patterns especially for
the European market.
Just as painted designs on Greek pots may seem today
to be purely decorative, whereas in fact they were
carefully and precisely worked out so that at the time,
their meaning was clear, so it is with Chinese pots. To
twentieth-century eyes, Chinese pottery may appear
merely decorative, yet to the Chinese the form of each
object and its adornment had meaning and
significance. The dragon represented the emperor,
and the phoenix, the empress; the pomegranate
indicated fertility, and a pair of fish, happiness;
mandarin ducks stood for wedded bliss; the pine tree,
peach, and crane are emblems of long life; and fish
leaping from waves indicated success in the civil
service examinations. Only when European decorative
themes were introduced did these meanings become
obscured or even lost
7.Paragraph 5 suggests which of the following about
the decorations on Chinese pottery?
A.They had more importance for aristocrats than for
ordinary citizens.
B.Their significance may have remained clear had the
Chinese not come under foreign influence.
C.They contain some of the same images that appear
on Greek pots
D.Their significance is now as clear to twentieth
century observers as it was to the early8.The word “these” in the passage refers to
A.religious ceremonies
B.descriptions
C.types of ware
D.pots
From early times pots were used in both religious and
secular contexts. The imperial court commissioned
work and in the Yuan dynasty (A.D. 1279-1368) an
imperial ceramic factory was established at
Jingdezhen. Pots played an important part in some
religious ceremonies. Long and often lyrical
descriptions of the different types of ware exist thatassist in classifying pots, although these sometimes
confuse an already large and complicated picture
Trade between the West and the settled and prosperous Chinese dynasties introduced new forms and different
technologies. One of the most far-reaching examples is the impact of the fine ninth-century AD. Chinese porcelain
wares imported into the Arab world. ▆So admired were these pieces that they encouraged the development of
earthenware made in imitation of porcelain and instigated research into the method of their manufacture. ▆From
the Middle East the Chinese acquired a blue pigment—a purified form of cobalt oxide unobtainable at that time in
China—that contained only a low level of manganese. Cobalt ores found in China have a high manganese content,
which produces a more muted blue-gray color. ▆In the seventeenth century, the trading activities of the Dutch
East India Company resulted in vast quantities of decorated Chinese porcelain being brought to Europe, which
stimulated and influenced the work of a wide variety of wares, notably Delft. ▆The Chinese themselves adapted
many specific vessel forms from the West, such as bottles with long spouts, and designed a range of decorative
patterns especially for the European market.
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
could the sentence best fit?10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is
provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in
134the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the
passage or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Ceramics have been produced in China
for a very long time.
Answer Choices
A. The Chinese produced earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain pottery and they used their ceramics for a
variety of utilitarian, architectural, and ceremonial purposes.
B. The shape and decoration of ceramics produced for religious use in China were influenced by Chinese
ceramics produced for export.
C. As a result of trade relations, Chinese ceramic production changed and Chinese influenced the ceramics
production of other countries.
D. Chinese burial ceramics have the longest and most varied history of production and were frequently
decorated with written texts that help scholars date them.
E. Before China had contact with the West, the meaning of various designs used to decorate Chinese ceramics
was well understood.
F. Ceramics made in imperial factories were used in both religious and non-religious contexts.
To review passage. Click View Text
TPO10-2 Variations in the Climate
1.According to paragraph 1, which of the following
must we find out in order to determine the impact of
human activities upon climate?
A.The major changes in climate over the past millennia
B.The degree to which the climate varies naturally
C.The best method for measuring climatic change
D.The millennium when humans began to interfere
with the climate
One of the most difficult aspects of deciding whether
current climatic events reveal evidence of the impact
of human activities is that it is hard to get a measure
of what constitutes the natural variability of the
climate. We know that over the past millennia the
climate has undergone major changes without any
significant human intervention. We also know that the
global climate system is immensely complicated and
that everything is in some way connected, and so the
system is capable of fluctuating in unexpected ways.
We need therefore to know how much the climate can
vary of its own accord in order to interpret with
confidence the extent to which recent changes are
natural as opposed to being the result of human
activities.
Instrumental records do not go back far enough to
provide us with reliable measurements of global
climatic variability on timescales longer than a century.
What we do know is that as we include longer time
intervals, the record shows increasing evidence of
slow swings in climate between different regimes. To
build up a better picture of fluctuations appreciably
further back in time requires us to use proxy records.
2.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Because physical and chemical properties of
substances are unchanging, they are useful records of
climate fluctuations over time.
B.For hundreds or thousands of years, people have
been observing changes in the chemical and physical
properties of substances in order to infer climate
change.
C.Because it takes long periods of time for the climate
to change, systematic changes in the properties of
substances are difficult to observe.
D.Changes in systematically deposited substances that
are affected by climate can indicate climate variations
over time.
3.According to paragraph 3, scientists are able to
reconstruct proxy temperature records by
A.studying regional differences in temperature
variations
B.studying and dating changes in the properties of
substances
C.observing changes in present day climate conditions
D.inferring past climate shifts from observations of
current climatic changes
4.According to paragraphs 3 and 4, proxy data have
suggested all of the following about the climate
EXCEPT:
A.Regional climates may change overtime.
B.The climate has changed very little in the past
10,000 years.
C.Global temperatures vary more than regional
temperatures.
D.Important natural changes in climate have occurred
over large timescales.
Over long periods of time, substances whose physical
and chemical properties change with the ambient
climate at the time can be deposited in a systematic
way to provide a continuous record of changes in
those properties overtime, sometimes for hundreds
or thousands of years. Generally, the layering occurs
on an annual basis, hence the observed changes in the
records can be dated. Information on temperature,
rainfall, and other aspects of the climate that can be
inferred from the systematic changes in properties is
usually referred to as proxy data. Proxy temperature
records have been reconstructed from ice core drilled
out of the central Greenland ice cap, calcite shells
embedded in layered lake sediments in Western
Europe, ocean floor sediment cores from the tropical
Atlantic Ocean, ice cores from Peruvian glaciers, and
ice cores from eastern Antarctica. While these records
provide broadly consistent indications that
temperature variations can occur on a global scale,
there are nonetheless some intriguing differences,
which suggest that the pattern of temperature
variations in regional climates can also differ
significantly from each other.
What the proxy records make abundantly clear is that
there have been significant natural changes in the
climate over timescales longer than a few thousand
years. Equally striking, however, is the relative stability
of the climate in the past 10,000 years (the Holocene
period).
5.The word “erratic”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.dramatic
B.important
C.unpredictable
D.common
6.All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 5 as
natural causes of climate change EXCEPT
A.atmospheric changes
B.the slow movement of landmasses
C.fluctuations in the amount of ice and snow
D.changes in ocean activity
To the extent that the coverage of the global climate
from these records can provide a measure of its true
variability, it should at least indicate how all the
natural causes of climate change have combined.
These include the chaotic fluctuations of theatmosphere, the slower but equally erratic behavior
of the oceans, changes in the land surfaces, and the
extent of ice and snow. Also included will be any
variations that have arisen from volcanic activity, solar
activity, and, possibly, human activities.
One way to estimate how all the various processes
leading to climate variability will combine is by using
computer models of the global climate. They can do
only so much to represent the full complexity of the
global climate and hence may give only limited
information about natural variability. Studies suggest
that to date the variability in computer simulations is
considerably smaller than in data obtained from the
proxy records.
7.The word “deliberations ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.records
B.discussions
C.results
D.variations8.The word “invoked”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.demonstrated
B.called upon
C.supported
D.expected
In addition to the internal variability of the global
climate system itself, there is the added factor of
external influences, such as volcanoes and solar
activity. There is a growing body of opinion that both
these physical variations have a measurable impact on
the climate. Thus we need to be able to include thesein our deliberations . Some current analyses conclude
that volcanoes and solar activity explain quite a
considerable amount of the observed variability in the
period from the seventeenth to the early twentiethcenturies, but that they cannot be invoked to explain
the rapid warming in recent decades.
In addition to the internal variability of the global climate system itself, there is the added factor of external
influences, such as volcanoes and solar activity. ▆There is a growing body of opinion that both these physical
variations have a measurable impact on the climate. ▆Thus we need to be able to include these in our
deliberations. ▆Some current analyses conclude that volcanoes and solar activity explain quite a considerable
amount of the observed variability in the period from the seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries, but that
they cannot be invoked to explain the rapid warming in recent decades. ▆
9.Look at the four squares [] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points. A number of different and complex factors influence changes in the
global climate over long periods of time.
Answer Choices
A. In the absence of instrumental records, proxy data allow scientists to infer information about past climates.
B. Scientists see a consistent pattern in the global temperature variations that have occurred in the past.
C. Computer models are used to estimate how the different causes of climate variability combine to account for
the climate variability that occurs.
D. Scientists have successfully separated natural climate variation from changes related to human activities.
E. Scientists believe that activities outside the global climate system, such as volcanoes and solar activity may
have significant effects on the system.
F. Scientists have concluded that human activity accounts for the rapid global warming in recent decades.
TPO10-3 Seventeenth - Century European Economic Growth
1. According to paragraph 1, what was true of Europe
during the medieval period?
A.Agricultural productivity declined.
B.There was relatively little economic growth.
C.The general level of prosperity declined.
D.Foreign trade began to play an important role in the
economy.
2.According to paragraph 2, one effect of the desire to
increase food production was that
A.land was cultivated in a different way
B.more farmers were needed
C.the rural economy was weakened
D.forests and wetlands were used for farming
3.Paragraph 4 supports the idea that increased
agricultural production was important for the
expansion of industry primarily because it
A.increased the number of available workers in rural
areas
B.provided new types of raw materials for use by
industry
C.resulted in an improvement in the health of the
rural cottage workers used by manufacturers
D.helped repair some of the ravages of the Thirty
Years' War♦In the late sixteenth century and into the
seventeenth, Europe continued the growth that had
lifted it out of the relatively less prosperous medieval
period (from the mid 400s to the late 1400s). Among
the key factors behind this growth were increased
agricultural productivity and an expansion of trade.
Populations cannot grow unless the rural economy can
produce enough additional food to feed more people.
During the sixteenth century, farmers brought more
land into cultivation at the expense of forests and fens
(low-lying wetlands). Dutch land reclamation in the
Netherlands in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries provides the most spectacular example of
the expansion of farmland: the Dutch reclaimed more
than 36,000 acres from 1590 to 1615 alone.
Much of the potential for European economic
development lay in what at first glance would seem to
have been only sleepy villages. Such villages, however,
generally lay in regions of relatively advanced
agricultural production, permitting not only the
survival of peasants but also the accumulation of an
agricultural surplus for investment. They had access to
urban merchants, markets, and trade routes.
Increased agricultural production in turn facilitated
rural industry, an intrinsic part of the expansion of
industry. Woolens and textile manufacturers, in
particular, utilized rural cottage (in-home) production,
which took advantage of cheap and plentiful rural
labor. In the German states, the ravages of the Thirty
Years' War (1618-1648) further moved textile
production into the countryside. Members of poor
peasant families spun or wove cloth and linens at
home for scant remuneration in an attempt tosupplement meager family income.
4.The word “meager” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.very necessary
B.very low
C.traditional
D.primary5.Why does the author mention that “English and
Dutch ships carrying rye from the Baltic states reached
Spain and Portugal ”?
A.To suggest that England and the Netherlands were
the two most important trading nations in
seventeenth-century Europe
B.To suggest how extensive trading relations were
C.To contrast the importance of agricultural products
with manufactured products
D.To argue that shipping introduced a range of new
products
More extended trading networks also helped develop
Europe's economy in this period. English and Dutch
ships carrying rye from the Baltic states reached
Spain and Portugal. Population growth generated an
expansion of small-scale manufacturing, particularly of
handicrafts, textiles, and metal production in England,
Flanders, parts of northern Italy, the southwestern
German states, and parts of Spain. Only iron smelting
and mining required marshaling a significant amount
of capital (wealth invested to create more wealth).
The development of banking and other financial
services contributed to the expansion of trade. By the
middle of the sixteenth century, financiers and traders
commonly accepted bills of exchange in place of gold
or silver for other goods. Bills of exchange, which had
their origins in medieval Italy, were promissory notes
(written promises to pay a specified amount of money
by a certain date) that could be sold to third parties. In
this way, they provided credit.
At mid-century, an
Antwerp financier only slightly exaggerated when he
claimed, "0ne can no more trade without bills of
exchange than sail without water." Merchants no
longer had to carry gold and silver over long,
dangerous journeys.
An Amsterdam merchant
purchasing soap from a merchant in Marseille could
go to an exchanger and pay the exchanger the
equivalent sum in guilders, the Dutch currency.
The
exchanger would then send a bill of exchange to a
colleague in Marseille, authorizing the colleague to
pay the Marseille merchant in the merchant's own
currency after the actual exchange of goods had taken
place.
6.According to paragraph 7, until the eighteenth
century, it was the principal function of which of the
following to provide funds for the state?
A.Bills of exchange
B.Exchangers who took loans
C.Banks
D.Business investment7.The phrase “an English innovation” in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.a new development introduced by the English
B.an arrangement found only in England
C.a type of agreement negotiated in English
D.a type of partnership based on English law
8.According to paragraph 8, each of the following was
a source of funds used to finance economic expansion
EXCEPT
A.groups of investors engaged in short-term financial
cooperation
B.the state
C.wealthy merchants
D.joint-stock companies
Bills of exchange contributed to the development of
banks, as exchangers began to provide loans. Not until
the eighteenth century, however, did such banks as
the Bank of Amsterdam and the Bank of England begin
to provide capital for business investment. Their
principal function was to provide funds for the state.
The rapid expansion in international trade also
benefitted from an infusion of capital, stemming
largely from gold and silver brought by Spanish vessels
from the Americas. This capital financed the
production of goods, storage, trade, and even credit
across Europe and overseas. Moreover an increased
credit supply was generated by investments and loans
by bankers and wealthy merchants to states and byjoint-stock partnerships —an English innovation (the
first major company began in 1600). Unlike short-term
financial cooperation between investors for a single
commercial undertaking, joint-stock companies
provided permanent funding of capital by drawing on
the investments of merchants and other investors who
purchased shares in the company.
143The development of banking and other financial services contributed to the expansion of trade. By the middle of
the sixteenth century, financiers and traders commonly accepted bills of exchange in place of gold or silver for
other goods. Bills of exchange, which had their origins in medieval Italy, were promissory notes (written promises
to pay a specified amount of money by a certain date) that could be sold to third parties. In this way, they
provided credit. ▆At mid-century, an Antwerp financier only slightly exaggerated when he claimed, “One can no
more trade without bills of exchange than sail without water." ▆Merchants no longer had to carry gold and silver
over long, dangerous journeys. ▆An Amsterdam merchant purchasing soap from a merchant in Marseille could
go to an exchanger and pay the exchanger the equivalent sum in guilders, the Dutch currency. ▆The exchanger
would then send a bill of exchange to a colleague in Marseille, authorizing the colleague to pay the Marseille
merchant in the merchant's own currency after the actual exchange of goods had taken place.
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points. In late sixteenth-and early seventeenth-century Europe, increased
agricultural production and the expansion of trade were important in economic growth.
Answer Choices
A. Bringing more land under cultivation produced enough food to create surpluses for trade and investment as
well as for supporting the larger populations that led to the growth of rural industry.
B. Most rural villages established an arrangement with a nearby urban center that enabled villagers to take
advantage of urban markets to sell any handicrafts they produced.
C. Increases in population and the expansion of trade led to increased manufacturing, much of it small-scale in
character but some requiring significant capital investment.
D. Increased capital was required for the production of goods, for storage, for trade, and for the provision of
credit throughout of Europe as well as distant markets overseas.
E. Bills of exchange were invented in medieval Italy but became less important as banks began to provide loans
for merchants.
F. The expansion of trade was facilitated by developments in banking and financial services and benefitted from
the huge influx of capital in the form of gold silver from the Americas.
TPO11
TPO11-1 Ancient Egyptian Sculpture
1. Paragraph 1 suggests that one reason Egyptian art is
viewed less favorably than other art is that Egyptian
art lacks
A.a realistic sense of human body proportion
B.a focus on distinctive forms of varying sizes
C.the originality of European art
D.the capacity to show the human body in motion
2. In paragraph 1, the author mentions all of the
following as necessary in appreciating Egyptian art
EXCEPTan understanding of
A.the reasons why the art was made
B.the nature of aristocratic Egyptian beliefs
C.the influences of Egyptian art on later art such as
classical Greek art
D.how the art was used
Paragraph 1: In order to understand ancient
Egyptian art, it is vital to know as much as possible of
the elite Egyptians' view of the world and the
functions and contexts of the art produced for them.
Without this knowledge we can appreciate only the
formal content of Egyptian art, and we will fail to
understand why it was produced or the concepts that
shaped it and caused it to adopt its distinctive forms.
In fact, a lack of understanding concerning the
purposes of Egyptian art has often led it to be
compared unfavorably with the art of other cultures:
Why did the Egyptians not develop sculpture in which
the body turned and twisted through space like
classical Greek statuary? Why do the artists seem to
get left and right confused? And why did they not
discover the geometric perspective as European artists
did in the Renaissance? The answer to such questions
has nothing to do with a lack of skill or imagination on
the part of Egyptian artists and everything to do with
the purposes for which they were producing their art.
3. According to paragraph 2, why are Egyptian statues
portrayed frontality?
A.To create a psychological effect of distance and
isolation
B.To allow them to fulfill their important role in
ceremonies of Egyptian life
C.To provide a contrast to statues with a decorative
function
D.To suggest the rigid, unchanging Egyptian
philosophical attitudes
4.The word “context” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.connection
B.influence
C.environment
D.requirement5. The author mentions “an architectural setting” in
the passage in order to
A.suggest that architecture was as important as
sculpture to Egyptian artists
B.offer a further explanation for the frontal pose of
Egyptian statues
C.explain how the display of statues replaced other
forms of architectural decoration
D.illustrate the religious function of Egyptian statues6. The word “they” in the passage refers to
A.statues
B.gateways
C.temples
D.pillared courts
The majority of three-dimensional representations,
whether standing, seated, or kneeling, exhibit what is
called frontality: they face straight ahead, neither
twisting nor turning. When such statues are viewed in
isolation, out of their original context and without
knowledge of their function, it is easy to criticize them
for their rigid attitudes that remained unchanged for
three thousand years. Frontality is, however, directly
related to the functions of Egyptian statuary and thecontexts in which the statues were set up. Statues
were created not for their decorative effect but to play
a primary role in the cults of the gods, the king, and
the dead. They were designed to be put in places
where these beings could manifest themselves in
order to be the recipients of ritual actions. Thus it
made sense to show the statue looking ahead at what
was happening in front of it, so that the living
performer of the ritual could interact with the divine
or deceased recipient. Very often such statues were
enclosed in rectangular shrines or wall niches whose
only opening was at the front, making it natural for
the statue to display frontality. Other statues weredesigned to be placed within an architectural setting,
for instance, in front of the monumental entrance
gateways to temples known as pylons, or in pillaredcourts, where they would be placed against or
between pillars: their frontality worked perfectly
within the architectural context.
7. According to paragraph 3, which of the following
statements about wooden statues is true?
A.Wooden statues were usually larger than stone
statues.
B.Wooden statues were made from a single piece of
wood.
C.Wooden statues contained pieces of metal or stone
attached to the front.
D.Wooden statues had a different effect on the viewer
than stone statues.
Paragraph 3: Statues were normally made of stone,
wood, or metal. Stone statues were worked from
single rectangular blocks of material and retained the
compactness of the original shape. The stone between
the arms and the body and between the legs in
standing figures or the legs and the seat in seated
ones was not normally cut away. From a practical
aspect this protected the figures against breakage and
psychologically gives the images a sense of strength
and power, usually enhanced by a supporting back
pillar. By contrast, wooden statues were carved from
several pieces of wood that were pegged together to
form the finished work, and metal statues were eithermade by wrapping sheet metal around a wooden core
or cast by the lost wax process. The arms could be
held away from the body and carry separate items in
their hands; there is no back pillar. The effect is
altogether lighter and freer than that achieved in
stone, but because both perform the same function,
formal wooden and metal statues still display
frontality.
8. The word depicts in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.imagines
B.classifies
C.elevates
D.portrays【Paragraph 4 】Apart from statues representing
deities, kings, and named members of the elite that
can be called formal, there is another group of
three-dimensional representations that depicts
generic figures, frequently servants, from the nonelite
population. The function of these is quite different.
Many are made to be put in the tombs of the elite in
order to serve the tomb owners in the afterlife. Unlike
formal statues that are limited to static poses of
standing, sitting, and kneeling, these figures depict a
wide range of actions, such as grinding grain, baking
bread, producing pots, and making music, and they
are shown in appropriate poses, bending and
squatting as they carry out their tasks.【Paragraph 4 】Apart from statues representing deities, kings, and named members of the elite that can be called
formal, there is another group of three-dimensional representations that depicts generic figures, frequently
servants, from the nonelite population. The function of these is quite different. Many are made to be put in
the tombs of the elite in order to serve the tomb owners in the afterlife. Unlike formal statues that are limited
to static poses of standing, sitting, and kneeling, these figures depict a wide range of actions, such as grinding
grain, baking bread, producing pots, and making music, and they are shown in appropriate poses, bending and
squatting as they carry out their tasks. 
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
In fact, it is the action and not the figure itself that is important.
Where would the sentence best fit?
14810．【 Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
The distinctive look of ancient Egyptian sculpture was determined largely by its function.
A.The twisted forms of Egyptian statues indicate their importance in ritual actions.
B.The reason Egyptian statues are motionless is linked to their central role in cultural rituals.
C.Stone, wood, and metal statues all display the feature of frontality.
D.Statues were more often designed to be viewed in isolation rather than placed within buildings.
E.The contrasting poses used in statues of elite and nonelite Egyptians reveal their difference in social status.
F.Although the appearances of formal and generic statues differ, they share the same function.
TPO11-2 Orientation and Navigation
1. Which of the following can be inferred about bird
migration from paragraph 1?
A.Birds will take the most direct migratory route to
their new habitat.
B.The purpose of migration is to join with larger
groups of birds.
C.Bird migration generally involves moving back and
forth between north and south.
D.The destination of birds' migration can change from
year to year.
2. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentencein the
passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information
A.Experiments revealed that caged starlings displayed
a lack of directional sense and restlessmovements.
B.Experiments revealed that caged starlings were
unable to orient themselves in the direction of their
normal migratory route.
C.Experiments revealed that the restless movement of
caged starlings had no clear direction.
D.Experiments revealed that caged starlings'
orientation was accurate unless the weather was
overcast.
Paragraph 1: To South Americans, robins are birds
that fly north every spring. To North Americans, the
robins simply vacation in the south each winter.
Furthermore, they fly to very specific places in South
America and will often come back to the same trees in
North American yards the following spring. The
question is not why they would leave the cold of
winter so much as how they find their way around.
The question perplexed people for years, until, in the
1950s, a German scientist named Gustave Kramer
provided some answers and, in the process, raised
new questions.
Paragraph 2: Kramer initiated important new kinds of
research regarding how animals orient and navigate.
Orientation is simply facing in the right direction;
navigation involves finding ones way from point A to
point B.
Paragraph 3: Early in his research, Kramer found
that caged migratory birds became very restless at
about the time they would normally have begun
migration in the wild. Furthermore, he noticed that as
they fluttered around in the cage, they often launched
themselves in the direction of their normal migratory
route. He then set up experiments with caged starlings
and found that their orientation was, in fact, in the
proper migratory direction except when the sky was
overcast, at which times there was no clear direction
to their restless movements. Kramer surmised,
therefore, that they were orienting according to the
position of the Sun. To test this idea, he blocked their
view of the Sun and used mirrors to change its
apparent position. He found that under these
circumstances, the birds oriented with respect to the
new "Sun." They seemed to be using the Sun as a
compass to determine direction. At the time,
3. The word“preposterous” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.unbelievable
B.inadequate
C.limited
D.creative
4.According to paragraph 3, why did Kramer use
mirrors to change the apparent position of the
Sun?A.To test the effect of light on the birds'
restlessness
B.To test whether birds were using the Sun to navigate
C.To simulate the shifting of light the birds would
encounter along their regular migratory route
D.To cause the birds to migrate at a different time than
they would in the wild
5. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 4 about Kramer s reason for filling one food
box and leaving the rest empty?
A.He believed the birds would eat food from only one
box.
B.He wanted to see whether the Sun alone controlled
the birds' ability to navigate toward the box with food.
C.He thought that if all the boxes contained food, this
would distract the birds from following their migratory
route.
D.He needed to test whether the birds preferred
having the food at any particular point of the
compass.this idea seemed preposterous . How could a bird
navigate by the Sun when some of us lose our way
with road maps? Obviously, more testing was in order.
Paragraph 4 : So, in another set of experiments,
Kramer put identical food boxes around the cage, with
food in only one of the boxes. The boxes were
stationary, and the one containing food was always at
the same point of the compass. However, its position
with respect to the surroundings could be changed by
revolving either the inner cage containing the birds or
the outer walls, which served as the background. As
long as the birds could see the Sun, no matter how
their surroundings were altered, they went directly to
the correct food box. Whether the box appeared in
front of the right wall or the left wall, they showed no
signs of confusion. On overcast days, however, the
birds were disoriented and had trouble locating their
food box.
6. According to paragraph 5, how did the birds fly
when the real Sun was visible?
A.They kept the direction of their flight constant.
B.They changed the direction of their flight at a rate of
15 degrees per hour.
C.They kept flying toward the Sun.
D.They flew in the same direction as the birds that
were seeing the artificial Sun.
7. The experiment described in paragraph 5 caused
Kramer to conclude that birds possess a biological
clock because
A.when birds navigate they are able to compensate for
the changing position of the Sun in the sky
B.birds innate bearings keep them oriented in a
direction that is within 15 degrees of the Suns
direction
C.birds' migration is triggered by natural
environmental cues, such as the position of the Sun
D.birds shift their direction at a rate of 15 degrees per
hour whether the Sun is visible or not
8. According to paragraph 6, how did the birds
navigate in the planetarium's nighttime environment?
A.By waiting for the dome to stop rotating
B.By their position on the planetarium floor
C.By orienting themselves to the stars in the artificial
night sky
D.By navigating randomly until they found the correct
orientation
Paragraph 5 : In experimenting with artificial suns,
Kramer made another interesting discovery. If the
artificial Sun remained stationary, the birds would shift
their direction with respect to it at a rate of about 15
degrees per hour, the Sun's rate of movement across
the sky. Apparently, the birds were assuming that the
"Sun" they saw was moving at that rate. When the
real Sun was visible, however, the birds maintained a
constant direction as it moved across the sky. In other
words, they were able to compensate for the Sun's
movement. This meant that some sort of biological
clock was operating-and a very precise clock at that.
Paragraph 6 : What about birds that migrate at night?
Perhaps they navigate by the night sky. To test the idea,
caged night-migrating birds were placed on the floor
of a planetarium during their migratory period. A
planetarium is essentially a theater with a domelike
ceiling onto which a night sky can be projected for any
night of the year. When the planetarium sky matched
the sky outside, the birds fluttered in the direction of
their normal migration. But when the dome was
rotated, the birds changed their direction to match the
artificial sky. The results clearly indicated that the
birds were orienting according to the stars.
152Paragraph 7 : There is accumulating evidence
indicating that birds navigate by using a wide variety
of environmental cues. Other areas under
investigation include magnetism, landmarks,
coastlines, sonar, and even smells. The studies are
complicated by the fact that the data are sometimes
contradictory and the mechanisms apparently change
from time to time. Furthermore, one sensory ability
may back up another.【Paragraph 4 】So, in another set of experiments, Kramer put identical food boxes around the cage, with food in
only one of the boxes. The boxes were stationary, and the one containing food was always at the same point of
the compass. However, its position with respect to the surroundings could be changed by revolving either the
inner cage containing the birds or the outer walls, which served as the background. As long as the birds could
see the Sun, no matter how their surroundings were altered, they went directly to the correct food box. 
Whether the box appeared in front of the right wall or the left wall, they showed no signs of confusion. On
overcast days, however, the birds were disoriented and had trouble locating their food box.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
He arranged the feed boxes at various positions on a compass.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Gustave Kramer conducted important research related to the ability of birds to orient and navigate.
A.Because caged birds become disoriented when the sky is overcast, Kramer hypothesized that birds orient
themselves according to the Sun's position.
B.In one set of experiments, Kramer placed the box containing food at the same point of the compass each time
he put food boxes in the birds' environment.
C.Kramer demonstrated that an internal biological clock allows starlings to compensate for the Sun's movement.
D.After several studies, Kramer surmised that an internal biological clock allows some species of birds to navigate
at night.
E.The role of environmental cues in birds' navigation is clear, for on overcast days, birds use objects besides the
Sun to orient themselves.
F.Kramer showed that night-migrating birds use the sky to navigate by the stars.
TPO11-3 Begging by Nestlings
1. The phrase “impose on” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.increase for
B.remove from
C.place on
D.distribute to2. The word “artificial” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.attractive
B.not real
C.short-term
D.well designed
3. Paragraph 2 indicates that the begging calls of tree
nesting warblers
A.put them at more risk than ground-nesting warblers
experience
B.can be heard from a greater distance than those of
ground-nesting warblers
C.are more likely to conceal the signaler than those of
ground-nesting warblers
D.have higher frequencies than those of
ground-nesting warblers
4. The experiment described in paragraph 2 supports
which of the following conclusions?
A.Predators are unable to distinguish between the
Paragraph 1: Many signals that animals make seem
to impose on the signalers costs that are overly
damaging. A classic example is noisy begging by
nestling songbirds when a parent returns to the nest
with food. These loud cheeps and peeps might give
the location of the nest away to a listening hawk or
raccoon, resulting in the death of the defenseless
nestlings. In fact, when tapes of begging tree swallows
were played at an artificial swallow nest containing an
egg, the egg in that “noisy”nest was taken or
destroyed by predators before the egg in a nearby
quiet nest in 29 of 37 trials.
Paragraph 2: Further evidence for the costs of
begging comes from a study of differences in the
begging calls of warbler species that nest on the
ground versus those that nest in the relative safety of
trees. The young of ground-nesting warblers produce
begging cheeps of higher frequencies than do their
tree-nesting relatives. These higher-frequency sounds
do not travel as far, and so may better conceal the
individuals producing them, who are especially
vulnerable to predators in their ground nests. David Haskell created artificial nests with clay eggs and
placed them on the ground beside a tape recorder
that played the begging calls of either tree-nesting or
of ground-nesting warblers. The eggs “advertised”by
the tree-nesters' begging calls were found bitten
significantly more often than the eggs associated with
the ground-nesters' calls.
154tree-nesting warblers except by the differing
frequencies of the calls.
B.When they can find them, predators prefer the eggs
of tree-nesting warblers to those of ground-nesting
warblers.
C.The higher frequencies of the begging cheeps of
ground-nesting warblers are an adaptation to the
threat that ground-nesting birds face from predators.
D.The danger of begging depends more on the
frequency of the begging cheep than on how loud it is.
5. The word “prediction” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.surprise
B.discovery
C.explanation
D.expectation
Paragraph 3: The hypothesis that begging calls have
evolved properties that reduce their potential for
attracting predators yields a prediction : baby birds of
species that experience high rates of nest predation
should produce softer begging signals of higher
frequency than nestlings of other species less often
victimized by nest predators. This prediction was
supported by data collected in one survey of 24
species from an Arizona forest, more evidence that
predator pressure favors the evolution of begging callsthat are hard to detect and pinpoint.
Paragraph 4: Given that predators can make it costly
to beg for food, what benefit do begging nestlings
derive from their communications? One possibility is
that a noisy baby bird provides accurate signals of its
real hunger and good health, making it worthwhile for
the listening parent to give it food in a nest where
several other offspring are usually available to be fed.
If this hypothesis is true, then it follows that nestlings
should adjust the intensity of their signals in relation
to the signals produced by their nestmates, who are
competing for parental attention. When
experimentally deprived baby robins are placed in a
nest with normally fed siblings, the hungry nestlings
beg more loudly than usual—but so do their
better-fed siblings, though not as loudly as the
hungrier birds.
6. It can be inferred from paragraphs 4 and 5 that
parent songbirds normally do not feed
A.nestlings that are too weak to beg for food as
vigorously as their nestmates
B.more than one hungry nestling during a single visit
to the nest
C.offspring that were fed by the parents on the
previous visit to the nest
D.nestlings that have been removed and then later put
back into their nest
7. In paragraph 6, the author compares the energy
costs of vigorous begging with the potential gain in
calories from such begging in order to
A.explain why begging for food vigorously can lead to
faster growth and increased size
B.explain how begging vigorously can increase an
individual 's chance of propagating its own genes
C.point out a weakness in a possible explanation for
why nestlings do not always beg vigorously
D.argue that the benefits of vigorous begging
outweigh any possible disadvantages
8. According to paragraph 6, which of the following
explains the fact that a well-fed nestling does not beg
loudly for more food?
A.There is no benefit for a nestling to get more food
than it needs to survive.
B.By begging loudly for food it does not need, a
nestling would unnecessarily expose itself to danger
from predators.
C.If a nestling begs loudly when it is not truly hungry,
then when it is truly hungry its own begging may be
drowned out by that of its well-fed siblings.
D.More of a nestling's genes will be passed to the next
generation if its hungry siblings get enough food tosurvive.
Paragraph 5: If parent birds use begging intensity to
direct food to healthy offspring capable of vigorous
begging, then parents should make food delivery
decisions on the basis of their offsprings'calls. Indeed,
if you take baby tree swallows out of a nest for an
hour feeding half the set and starving the other half,
when the birds are replaced in the nest, the starved
youngsters beg more loudly than the fed birds, and
the parent birds feed the active beggars more than
those who beg less vigorously.
【Paragraph 6 】As these experiments show, begging
apparently provides a signal of need that parents use
to make judgments about which offspring can benefit
most from a feeding. But the question arises, why
don't nestlings beg loudly when they aren't all that
hungry? By doing so, they could possibly secure more
food, which should result in more rapid growth or
larger size, either of which is advantageous. The
answer lies apparently not in the increased energy
costs of exaggerated begging—such energy costs are
small relative to the potential gain in calories—but
rather in the damage that any successful cheater
would do to its siblings, which share genes with one
another. An individual's success in propagating his or
her genes can be affected by more than just his or her
own personal reproductive success. Because close
relatives have many of the same genes, animals that
harm their close relatives may in effect be destroying
some of their own genes. Therefore, a begging
nestling that secures food at the expense of its siblings
might actually leave behind fewer copies of its genes
overall than it might otherwise.
156【Paragraph 1 】Many signals that animals make seem to impose on the signalers costs that are overly damaging.
A.classic example is noisy begging by nestling songbirds when a parent returns to the nest with food. These
loud cheeps and peeps might give the location of the nest away to a listening hawk or raccoon, resulting in the
death of the defenseless nestlings. In fact, when tapes of begging tree swallows were played at an artificial
swallow nest containing an egg, the egg in that “noisy”nest was taken or destroyed by predators before the egg
in a nearby quiet nest in 29 of 37 trials. 
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
The cheeping provides important information to the parent, but it could also attract the attention of others.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Experiments have shed much light on the begging behaviors of baby songbirds .
A.Songbird species that are especially vulnerable to predators have evolved ways of reducing the dangers
associated with begging calls.
B.Songbird parents focus their feeding effort on the nestlings that beg loudest for food.
C.It is genetically disadvantageous for nestlings to behave as if they are really hungry when they are not really
hungry.
D.The begging calls of songbird nestlings provide a good example of overly damaging cost to signalers of signaling.
E.The success with which songbird nestlings communicate their hunger to their parents is dependent on the
frequencies of the nestlings' begging calls.
D.Songbird nestlings have evolved several different ways to communicate the intensity of their hunger to their
parents.
TPO12
TPO12-1 Which Hand Did They Use?
1. It can be inferred from paragraph 1 that even when
paint was sprayed by mouth to make a hand stencil
A.there was no way to tell which hand was stenciled
B.the stenciled hand was the weaker hand
C.the stenciled hand was the dominant hand
D.artists stenciled more images of the dominant hand
than they did of the weak
2. which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentencein the
passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Right-handed artists could more easily have avoided
casting shadows on their work, because engravings in
prehistoric caves were lit from the left.
B.The tips of engraving tools and brushes indicate that
these instruments were used by right-handed artists
whose work was lit from the left.
C.The best lighting for most engravings suggests that
they were made by right-handed people trying to
avoid the shadow of their hands interfering with their
work.
D.Right-handed artists try to avoid having the brush
they are using interfere with the light source.
Paragraph 1: We all know that many more people
today are right-handed than left-handed. Can one
trace this same pattern far back in prehistory? Much
of the evidence about right-hand versus left-hand
dominance comes from stencils and prints found in
rock shelters in Australia and elsewhere, and in many
Ice Age caves in France, Spain, and Tasmania. When a
left hand has been stenciled, this implies that the
artist was right-handed, and vice versa. Even though
the paint was often sprayed on by mouth, one canassume that the dominant hand assisted in the
operation. One also has to make the assumption that
hands were stenciled palm downward—a left hand
stenciled palm upward might of course look as if it
were a right hand. Of 158 stencils in the French cave
of Gargas, 136 have been identified as left, and only
22 as right; right-handedness was therefore heavily
predominant.
Paragraph 2: Cave art furnishes other types ofevidence of this phenomenon. Most engravings, for
example, are best lit from the left, as befits the work
of right-handed artists, who generally prefer to have
the light source on the left so that the shadow of
their hand does not fall on the tip of the engraving
tool or brush. In the few cases where an Ice Age figure
isdepicted holding something, it is mostly, though not
always, in the right hand.
1583．All of the following are mentioned in paragraphs 1
and 2 as evidence of right-handedness in art and
artists EXCEPT
A.the ideal source of lighting for most engravings
B.the fact that a left hand stenciled palm upward
might look like a right hand
C.the prevalence of outlines of left hands
D.figures in prehistoric art holding objects with the
right hand
4. According to paragraph 5, what characteristic of a
Neolithic spoon would imply that the spoon's
owner .as right-handed?
A.The direction of the fibers
B.Its long handle
C.The yew wood it is carved from
D.Wear on its left side
Paragraph 3: Clues to right-handedness can also be
found by other methods. Right-handers tend to have
longer, stronger, and more muscular bones on the
right side, and Marcellin Boule as long ago as 1911
noted the La Chapelle-aux-Saints Neanderthal
skeleton had a right upper arm bone that was
noticeably stronger than the left. Similar observations
have been made on other Neanderthal skeletons such
as La Ferrassie I and Neanderthal itself.
Paragraph 4: Fractures and other cut marks are
another source of evidence. Right-handed soldiers
tend to be wounded on the left. The skeleton of a 40-
or 50-year-old Nabatean warrior, buried 2,000 years
ago in the Negev Desert, Israel, had multiple healed
fractures to the skull, the left arm, and the ribs.
Tools themselves can be revealing. Long-handed
Neolithic spoons of yew wood preserved in Alpine
villages dating to 3000 B.C. have survived; the signs of
rubbing on their left side indicate that their users were
right-handed. The late Ice Age rope found in the
French cave of Lascaux consists of fibers spiraling to
the right, and was therefore tressed by a righthander.
5. In paragraph 5, why does the author mention the
Ice Age rope found in the French cave of Lascaux?
A.As an example of an item on which the marks of
wear imply that it was used by a right-handed person
B.Because tressing is an activity that is easier for a
right-handed person than for a left-handed person
C.Because the cave of Lascaux is the site where
researchers have found several prehistoric tools made
for right-handed people
D.As an example of an item whose construction shows
that it was right handed made by a right-person
6. The word “criteria” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
○standards
○findings
○ideas
○techniques
7. What is the author's primary purpose in paragraph
7?
A.To illustrate the importance of studying the brain
B.To demonstrate that human beings are the only
mammal to desire fine control of movement
C.To contrast the functions of the two hemispheres of
the brain
D.To demonstrate that right-hand preference has
existed for a long time
Occasionally one can determine whether stone tools
were used in the right hand or the left, and it is even
possible to assess how far back this feature can be
traced. In stone toolmaking experiments, Nick Toth, a
right-hander, held the core (the stone that would
become the tool) in his left hand and the hammer
stone in his right. As the tool was made, the core was
rotated clockwise, and the flakes, removed in
sequence, had a little crescent of cortex (the core's
outer surface) on the side. Toth's knapping produced
56 percent flakes with the cortex on the right, and 44
percent left-oriented flakes. A left-handed toolmaker
would produce the opposite pattern. Toth has appliedthese criteria to the similarly made pebble tools from
a number of early sites (before 1.5 million years) at
Koobi Fora, Kenya, probably made by Homo habilis. At
seven sites he found that 57 percent of the flakes
were right-oriented, and 43 percent left, a pattern
almost identical to that produced today.
8.What is the author's main purpose in paragraph 7?
A.To illustrate the importance of studying the brain
B.To demonstrate that human beings are the only
mammal to desire fine control of movement
C.To contrast the functions of the two hemispheres of
the brain
D.To demonstrate that right-hand preference has
existed for a long time
About 90 percent of modern humans are right-handed:
we are the only mammal with a preferential use of
one hand. The part of the brain responsible for fine
control and movement is located in the left cerebral
hemisphere, and the findings above suggest that the
human brain was already asymmetrical in its structure
and function not long after 2 million years ago. Among
Neanderthalers of 70,000 –35,000 years ago,
Marcellin Boule noted that the La Chapelle-aux-Saints
individual had a left hemisphere slightly bigger than
the right, and the same was found for brains of
specimens from Neanderthal, Gibraltar, and La Quina.【Paragraph 1 】We all know that many more people today are right-handed than left-handed. Can one trace this
same pattern far back in prehistory? Much of the evidence about right-hand versus left-hand dominance
comes from stencils and prints found in rock shelters in Australia and elsewhere, and in many Ice Age caves in
France, Spain, and Tasmania. When a left hand has been stenciled, this implies that the artist was right-handed,
and vice versa. Even though the paint was often sprayed on by mouth, one can assume that the dominant hand
assisted in the operation. One also has to make the assumption that hands were stenciled palm downward—a left
hand stenciled palm upward might of course look as if it were a right hand. Of 158 stencils in the French cave of
Gargas, 136 have been identified as left, and only 22 as right; right-handedness was therefore heavily
predominant.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
The stencils of hands found in these shelters and caves allow us to draw conclusions about which hand was
dominant.
Where would the sentence best fit?
16110．Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Several categories of evidence indicate that people have always been predominantly right-handed
A.Stencils of right-handed figures are characteristic of cave art in France, Spain, and Tasmania.
B.Signs on the skeletal remains of prehistoric figures, including arm-bone size and injury marks, imply that these
are the remains of right-handed people.
C.Instruments such as spoons, ropes, and pebble tools show signs that indicate they were used or constructed by
right-handed people.
D.The amount of prehistoric art created by right-handed artists indicates that left-handed people were in the
minority.
E.Neanderthal skeletons often have longer finger bones in the right hand, which is evidence that the right hand
was stronger.
F.Nick Toth, a modem right-handed toolmaker. has shown that prehistoric tools were knapped to fit the right
hand.
TPO12-2 Transition to Sound in Film
1. The word “paradoxes” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.difficulties
B.accomplishments
C.parallels
D.contradictions
2. Why does the author mention “Japanese benshi”
and “original musical compositions”?
A.To suggest that audiences preferred other forms of
entertainment to film before the transition to sound
inthe1920's
B.To provide examples of some of the first sounds that
were recorded for film
C.To indicate some ways in which sound accompanied
film before the innovation of sound films in the late
1920s
D.To show how the use of sound in films changed
during different historical periods
Paragraph 1: The shift from silent to sound film at
the end of the 1920s marks, so far, the most important
transformation in motion picture history. Despite all
the highly visible technological developments in
theatrical and home delivery of the moving image that
have occurred over the decades since then, no single
innovation has come close to being regarded as a
similar kind of watershed. In nearly every language,
however the words are phrased, the most basic
division in cinema history lies between films that are
mute and films that speak.
Paragraph 2: Yet this most fundamental standard ofhistorical periodization conceals a host of paradoxes.
Nearly every movie theater, however modest, had a
piano or organ to provide musical accompaniment to
silent pictures. In many instances, spectators in the era
before recorded sound experienced elaborate aural
presentations alongside movies' visual images, from
the Japanese benshi (narrators) crafting multivoiced
dialogue narratives to original musical compositions
performed by symphony-size orchestras in Europe and
the United States. In Berlin, for the premiere
performance outside the Soviet Union of The
Battleship Potemkin, film director Sergei Eisenstein
worked with Austrian composer Edmund Meisel
(1874-1930) on a musical score matching sound to
image; the Berlin screenings with live music helped to
bring the film its wide international fame.
3. Paragraph 2 suggests which of the following about
Eisenstein's film The Battleship Potemkirf?
A.The film was not accompanied by sound before its
Berlin screening.
B.The film was unpopular in the Soviet Union before it
was screened in Berlin.
C.Eisenstein 's film was the first instance of
collaboration between a director and a composer.
D.Eisenstein believed that the musical score in a film
was as important as dialogue.
4. The word“overshadowed” in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.distracted from
B.explained
C.conducted
D.coordinated with
5. According to paragraph 3, which of the following is
NOT true of the technological and aesthetic
experiments of the 1920's?
A.Because the costs of introducing recorded sound
were low, it was the only innovation that was put to
use in the 1920's.
B.The introduction of recorded sound prevented the
development of other technological innovations in the
1920's.
C.The new technological and aesthetic developments
of the 1920s included the use of color, new screen
formats, and television.
D.Many of the innovations developed in the 1920s
were not widely introduced until as late as the 1950's.
6. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentencein the
passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information
A.It was difficult for some critics in the 1920s to
imagine why the idea of sound film had faded from
sight well before the First World War.
B.As surprising as it seems today, some critics in the
1920s believed that the new attempts at sound films
would fade just as quickly as the attempts made
before the First World War.
Paragraph 3: Beyond that, the triumph of recorded
sound has overshadowed the rich diversity of
technological and aesthetic experiments with the
visual image that were going forward simultaneously
in the 1920s. New color processes, larger or differently
shaped screen sizes, multiple-screen projections, even
television, were among the developments invented or
tried out during the period, sometimes with startling
success. The high costs of converting to sound and the
early limitations of sound technology were among the
factors that suppressed innovations or retarded
advancement in these other areas. The introduction of
new screen formats was put off for a quarter century,
and color, though utilized over the next two decades
for special productions, also did not become a norm
until the 1950s.
C.Though some early critics thought that sound film
would fade, its popularity during the First World War
proved that it was not simply a technical novelty.
no for an answer.
D.Although some critics predicted well before the First
World War that sound film would be an
importanttechnical innovation, it was not attempted
until the 1920s.
7. According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
true about the technical problems of early sound
films?
A.Linking images with recorded sound was a larger
obstacle than weak sound amplification or fragile
sound recordings.
B.Sound films in the 1920s were unable to solve the
technical flaws found in sound films before the First
World War.
C.Technical inadequacies occurred less frequently in
early sound films than critics suggested.
D.Critics assumed that it would be impossible to
overcome the technical difficulties experienced with
earlier sound films.
8. In paragraph 5, commercial radio programming is
best described as the result of
A.a financially successful development that enabled
large telecommunications firms to weaken their
competition.
B.the desire of electronics and telecommunications
companies to make sound technology profitable
C.a major development in the broadcasting industry
that occurred before the 1920s
D.the cooperation between telecommunications
companies and the motion picture industry
Paragraph 4: Though it may be difficult to imagine
from a later perspective, a strain of critical opinion in
the 1920s predicted that sound film would be a
technical novelty that would soon fade from sight, just
as had many previous attempts, dating well back
before the First World War, to link images with
recorded sound. These critics were making a common
assumption—that the technological inadequacies of
earlier efforts (poor synchronization, weak sound
amplification, fragile sound recordings) would
invariably occur again. To be sure, their evaluation of
the technical flaws in 1920s sound experiments was
not so far off the mark, yet they neglected to take into
account important new forces in the motion picture
field that, in a sense, would not take no for an answer.
Paragraph 5: These forces were the rapidly expanding
electronics and telecommunications companies that
were developing and linking telephone and wireless
technologies in the 1920s. In the United States, they
included such firms as American Telephone and
Telegraph, General Electric, and Westinghouse. They
were interested in all forms of sound technology and
all potential avenues for commercial exploitation.
Their competition and collaboration were creating the
broadcasting industry in the United States, beginning
with the introduction of commercial radio
programming in the early 1920s. With financial assets
165considerably greater than those in the motion picture
industry, and perhaps a wider vision of the
relationships among entertainment and
communications media, they revitalized research into
recording sound for motion pictures.
Paragraph 6: In 1929 the United States motion
picture industry released more than 300 sound films
—a rough figure, since a number were silent films
with music tracks, or films prepared in dual versions,
to take account of the many cinemas not yet wired for
sound. At the production level, in the United States
the conversion was virtually complete by 1930. In
Europe it took a little longer, mainly because there
were more small producers for whom the costs of
sound were prohibitive, and in other parts of the
world problems with rights or access to equipment
delayed the shift to sound production for a few more
years (though cinemas in major cities may have been
wired in order to play foreign sound films). The
triumph of sound cinema was swift, complete, and
enormously popular.【Paragraph 5 】These forces were the rapidly expanding electronics and telecommunications companies that were
developing and linking telephone and wireless technologies in the 1920s. In the United States, they included such
firms as American Telephone and Telegraph, General Electric, and Westinghouse. They were interested in all forms
of sound technology and all potential avenues for commercial exploitation. Their competition and collaboration
were creating the broadcasting industry in the United States, beginning with the introduction of commercial radio
programming in the early 1920s. With financial assets considerably greater than those in the motion picture
industry, and perhaps a wider vision of the relationships among entertainment and communications media, they
revitalized research into recording sound for motion pictures.
【Paragraph 6 】 In 1929 the United States motion picture industry released more than 300 sound films —a rough
figure, since a number were silent films with music tracks, or films prepared in dual versions, to take account of
the many cinemas not yet wired for sound. At the production level, in the United States the conversion was
166virtually complete by 1930. In Europe it took a little longer, mainly because there were more small producers
for whom the costs of sound were prohibitive, and in other parts of the world problems with rights or access to
equipment delayed the shift to sound production for a few more years (though cinemas in major cities may have
been wired in order to play foreign sound films). The triumph of sound cinema was swift, complete, and
enormously popular.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
When this research resulted in the development of vastly improved sound techniques, film studios became
convinced of the importance of converting to sound.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
The transition from silent to sound films was the most important development in film history.
A.Although music and speech had frequently accompanied film presentations before the 1920s, there was a
strong desire to add sound to the films themselves.
B.Because of intense interest in developing and introducing sound in film, the general use of other technological
innovations being developed in the 1920s was delayed.
C.The rapid progress in sound technology made possible by the involvement of telecommunications companies
transformed the motion picture industry.
D.Japanese filmmakers had developed the technology for creating sound films before directors in Europe and the
United States began experimenting with sound.
E.Before the First World War, film directors showed little interest in linking images with recorded sound.
F.The arrival of sound film technology in the United States forced smaller producers in the motion picture industry
out of business.
TPO12-3 Water in the Desert
1. Which of the following statements about annual
rainfall can be inferred from paragraph 1?
A.Flat desert areas receive more annual rainfall than
desert areas with mountains.
B.Areas that receive more than four inches of rain per
year are not considered deserts.
C.Many areas receive less than four inches of annual
rainfall, but only a few are deserts.
D.Annual rainfall has no impact on the groundwater
resources of desert areas.
2. The word “drastically” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.obviously
B.unfortunately
C.rapidly
D.severely
Paragraph 1: Rainfall is not completely absent in
desert areas, but it is highly variable. An annual
rainfall of four inches is often used to define the limits
of a desert. The impact of rainfall upon the surface
water and groundwater resources of the desert is
greatly influenced by landforms. Flats and depressions
where water can collect are common features, but
they make up only a small part of the landscape.
Paragraph 2: Arid lands, surprisingly, contain some
of the world 's largest river systems, such as the
Murray-Darling in Australia, the Rio Grande in North
America, the Indus in Asia, and the Nile in Africa.
These rivers and river systems are known as
"exogenous" because their sources lie outside the arid
zone. They are vital for sustaining life in some of the
driest parts of the world. For centuries, the annual
floods of the Nile, Tigris, and Euphrates, for example,
have brought fertile silts and water to the inhabitants
of their lower valleys. Today, river discharges are
increasingly controlled by human intervention,
creating a need for international river-basin
agreements. The filling of the Ataturk and other damsin Turkey has drastically reduced flows in the
Euphrates, with potentially serious consequences for
Syria and Iraq.
3. The word “dwellers” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.settlements
B.farmers
C.tribes
D.inhabitants
4. Paragraph 5 supports all of the following statements
about the groundwater In deserts EXCEPT:
A.The groundwater is consistently found just below
the surface
B.A small part of the groundwater helps maintain lake
levels
C.Most of the groundwater is not recharged through
surface water
D.The groundwater is increasingly used as a source of
freshwater
Pasragraph3 : The flow of exogenous rivers varies
with the season. The desert sections of long rivers
respond several months after rain has fallen outside
the desert, so that peak flows may be in the dry
season. This is useful for irrigation, but the high
temperatures, low humidities, and different day
lengths of the dry season, compared to the normal
growing season, can present difficulties with some
crops.
Paragraph4 : Regularly flowing rivers and streams
that originate within arid lands are known as
"endogenous." These are generally fed by
groundwater springs, and many issue from limestone
massifs, such as the Atlas Mountains in Morocco.
Basaltic rocks also support springs, notably at the
Jabal Al-Arab on the Jordan-Syria border. Endogenous
rivers often do not reach the sea but drain into inland
basins, where the water evaporates or is lost in the
ground. Most desert streambeds are normally dry, but
they occasionally receive large flows of water and
sediment.
Paragraph 5: Deserts contain large amounts of
groundwater when compared to the amounts they
hold in surface stores such as lakes and rivers. But only
a small fraction of groundwater enters the
hydrological cycle —feeding the flows of streams,
maintaining lake levels, and being recharged (or
refilled) through surface flows and rainwater. In recent
years, groundwater has become an increasinglyimportant source of freshwater for desert dwellers.
The United Nations Environment Programme and the
World Bank have funded attempts to survey the
groundwater resources of arid lands and to develop
appropriate extraction techniques. Such programs are
much needed because in many arid lands there is only
a vague idea of the extent of groundwater resources.
It is known, however, that the distribution of
groundwater is uneven, and that much of it lies at
great depths.
5. The word “fractures” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.streams
B.cracks
C.storms
D.earthquakes
6. According to paragraph 6, which of the following
statements about aquifers in deserts is true?
A.Water from limestone and sandstone aquifers is
generally better to drink than water from sand and
gravel aquifers
B.Sand and gravel aquifers tend to contain less
groundwater than limestone or sandstone aquifers
C.Groundwater in deep aquifers is more likely to be
recharged than groundwater in shallow aquifers
D.Sedimentary rocks, because they are porous, are not
capable of storing large amounts of groundwater
7. According to paragraph 6, the aquifers called fossil
waters
A.contain fossils that are thousands of years old
B.took more than 10,000 years to become saturated
with water
C.have not gained or lost any water for thousands of
years
D.have been collecting water for the past 10,000 years
8. The passage supports which of the following
statements about water in the desert?
A.The most visible forms of water are not the most
widespread forms of water in the desert.
B.Groundwater in the desert cannot become a source
of drinking water but can be used for irrigation.
C.Most of the water in the desert is contained in
shallow aquifers that are being rapidly recharged.
D.Desert areas that lack endogenous or exogenous
rivers and streams cannot support life.
Paragraph 6: Groundwater is stored in the pore
spaces and joints of rocks and unconsolidated
(unsolidified) sediments or in the openings widened
through fractures and weathering. The
water-saturated rock or sediment is known as an
"aquifer". Because they are porous, sedimentary rocks,
such as sandstones and conglomerates, are important
potential sources of groundwater. Large quantities of
water may also be stored in limestones when joints
and cracks have been enlarged to form cavities. Most
limestone and sandstone aquifers are deep and
extensive but may contain groundwaters that are not
being recharged. Most shallow aquifers in sand and
gravel deposits produce lower yields, but they can be
rapidly recharged. Some deep aquifers are known as
"fossil waters. The term "fossil" describes water that
has been present for several thousand years. These
aquifers became saturated more than 10,000 years
ago and are no longer being recharged.
Paragraph 7: Water does not remain immobile in an
aquifer but can seep out at springs or leak into other
aquifers. The rate of movement may be very slow: in
the Indus plain, the movement of saline (salty)
groundwaters has still not reached equilibrium after
70 years of being tapped. The mineral content of
groundwater normally increases with the depth, but
even quite shallow aquifers can be highly saline.
170【Paragraph 4 】Regularly flowing rivers and streams that originate within arid lands are known as "endogenous."
These are generally fed by groundwater springs, and many issue from limestone massifs, such as the Atlas
Mountains in Morocco. Basaltic rocks also support springs, notably at the Jabal Al-Arab on the Jordan-Syria border.
Endogenous rivers often do not reach the sea but drain into inland basins, where the water evaporates or is lost
in the ground. Most desert streambeds are normally dry, but they occasionally receive large flows of water and
sediment. 
【Paragraph 5 】Deserts contain large amounts of groundwater when compared to the amounts they hold in
surface stores such as lakes and rivers. But only a small fraction of groundwater enters the hydrological cycle —
feeding the flows of streams, maintaining lake levels, and being recharged (or refilled) through surface flows and
rainwater. In recent years, groundwater has become an increasingly important source of freshwater for desert
dwellers. The United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank have funded attempts to survey the
groundwater resources of arid lands and to develop appropriate extraction techniques. Such programs are much
needed because in many arid lands there is only a vague idea of the extent of groundwater resources. It is known,
however, that the distribution of groundwater is uneven, and that much of it lies at great depths.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage
These sudden floods provide important water supplies but can also be highly destructive.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Directions 】Select from the seven sentences below, the two sentences that correctly characterize
endogenous rivers and the three sentences that correctly characterize exogenous rivers. Drag each sentence you
select into the appropriate column of the table. Two of the sentences will NOT be used. This question is worth 3
points.
A.Their water generally comes from groundwater springs.
B.Their water is saltier than the water of most other rivers.
C.They include some of the world's largest rivers.
D.They originate outside the desert.
E.They often drain into inland basins and do not reach the sea.
F.They contain too much silt to be useful for irrigation.
G.Their water flow generally varies with the season of the year.
TPO13
TPO13-1 Types of Social Groups
1.The word “complex” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.delicate
B.elaborate
C.private
D.common
2.According to paragraph 1, which of the following is
true of a relationship?
A.It is a structure of associations with many people.
B.It should be studied in the course of a social
interaction.
C.It places great demands on people.
D.It develops gradually overtime.
3.The word endowing in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.leaving
B.exposing
C.providing
D.understanding
4.Which of the following can be inferred about
instrumental ties from the author's mention of
working with competitors in paragraph 2?
A.Instrumental ties can develop even in situations in
which people would normally not cooperate.
B.Instrumental ties require as much emotional
investment as expressive ties.
C.Instrumental ties involve security, love, and
acceptance.
D.Instrumental ties should be expected to be
significant.
Life places us in a complex web of relationships with
other people. Our humanness arises out of these
relationships in the course of social interaction.
Moreover, our humanness must be sustained through
social interaction—and fairly constantly so. When an
association continues long enough for two people to
become linked together by a relatively stable set of
expectations, it is called a relationship.
People are bound within relationships by two types of
bonds: expressive ties and instrumental ties.
Expressive ties are social links formed when we
emotionally invest ourselves in and commit ourselves
to other people. Through association with people who
are meaningful to us, we achieve a sense of security,
love, acceptance, companionship, and personal worth.
Instrumental ties are social links formed when we
cooperate with other people to achieve some goal.
Occasionally, this may mean working with instead of
against competitors. More often, we simply cooperatewith others to reach some end without endowing the
relationship with any larger significance.
5.The phrase “size up ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.enlarge
B.evaluate
C.impress
D.accept
Sociologists have built on the distinction between
expressive and instrumental ties to distinguish
between two types of groups: primary and secondary.
A.primary group involves two or more people who
enjoy a direct, intimate, cohesive relationship with
one another. Expressive ties predominate in primary
groups; we view the people as ends in themselves and
valuable in their own right. A secondary group entails
two or more people who are involved in an
impersonal relationship and have come together for a
specific, practical purpose. Instrumental ties
predominate in secondary groups; we perceive people
as means to ends rather than as ends in their own
right. Sometimes primary group relationships evolve
out of secondary group relationships. This happens in
many work settings. People on the job often develop
close relationships with coworkers as they come to
share gripes, jokes, gossip, and satisfactions.
A.number of conditions enhance the likelihood that
primary groups will arise. First, group size is important.
We find it difficult to get to know people personally
when they are milling about and dispersed in large
groups. In small groups we have a better chance to
initiate contact and establish rapport with them.
Second, face-to-face contact allows us to size up
others. Seeing and talking with one another in close
physical proximity makes possible a subtle exchange of
ideas and feelings. And third, the probability that we
will develop primary group bonds increases as we
have frequent and continuous contact. Our ties with
people often deepen as we interact with them across
time and gradually evolve interlocking habits and
interests.
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Sociologists think that cultural patterns establish
connections between the individual and the larger
society.
B.Sociologists believe that individuals with a sense of
oneness bridge the gap between society and primary
groups.
C.Sociologists think primary groups contribute to
social solidarity because they help maintain a society's
cultural patterns.
D.Sociologists believe that the cultural patterns that
provide social solidarity arise as bridges from primary
groups.
Primary groups are fundamental to us and to society.
First, primary groups are critical to the socialization
process. Within them, infants and children are
introduced to the ways of their society. Such groups
are the breeding grounds in which we acquire the
norms and values that equip us for social life.
Sociologists view primary groups as bridges between
individuals and the larger society because they
transmit, mediate, and interpret a society's cultural
patterns and provide the sense of oneness so critical
for social solidarity.
Second, primary groups are fundamental because they
provide the settings in which we meet most of our
personal needs. Within them, we experience
companionship, love, security, and an overall sense of
well-being. Not surprisingly, sociologists find that the
strength of a group's primary ties has implications for
the group's functioning. For example, the stronger the
primary group ties of a sports team playing together,
the better their record is.
7.The word “deviate” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.detract
B.advance
C.select
D.depart
8.According to paragraph 7, why would a social group
use shunning?
A.To enforce practice of the kinds of behavior
acceptable to the group
B.To discourage offending individuals from remaining
in the group
C.To commend and reward the behavior of the other
members of the group
D.To decide which behavioral norms should be passed
on to the next generation
Third, primary groups are fundamental because they
serve as powerful instruments for social control. Their
members command and dispense many of the
rewards that are so vital to us and that make our lives
seem worthwhile. Should the use of rewards fail,
members can frequently win by rejecting orthreatening to ostracize those who deviate from the
primary group's norms. For instance, some social
groups employ shunning (a person can remain in the
community, but others are forbidden to interact with
the person) as a device to bring into line individuals
whose behavior goes beyond that allowed by the
particular group. Even more important, primary
groups define social reality for us by structuring our
experiences. By providing us with definitions of
situations, they elicit from our behavior that conforms
to group-devised meanings. Primary groups, then,
serve both as carriers of social norms and as enforcers
of them.
Second, primary groups are fundamental because they provide the settings in which we meet most of our
personal needs. ▌Within them, we experience companionship, love, security, and an overall sense of well-being.
▌Not surprisingly, sociologists find that the strength of a group's primary ties has implications for the group's
functioning. ▌For example, the stronger the primary group ties of a sports team playing together, the better their
record is. ▌
9.Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
People who do not live alone, for example, tend to make healthier life choices and develop fewer pathologies than
people who live by themselves.
10.Directions: Complete the table below by selecting three answer choices that are characteristics of primary
groups and two answer choices that are characteristics of secondary groups. This question is worth 3 points.
A. Developing socially acceptable behavior
B. Working together against competitors
C. Experiencing pressure from outside forces
D. Viewing people as a means to an end
E. Existing for practical purposes
F. Providing meaning for life situations
G. Involving close relationships
TPO13-2 Biological Clocks
Survival and successful reproduction usually require
the activities of animals to be coordinated with
predictable events around them.
Consequently, the
timing and rhythms of biological functions must
closely match periodic events like the solar day, the
tides, the lunar cycle, and the seasons. The relations
between animal activity and these periods,
particularly for the daily rhythms, have been of such
interest and importance that a huge amount of work
has been done on them and the special research field
of chronobiology has emerged. Normally, the
constantly changing levels of an animal's
activity—sleeping, feeding, moving, reproducing,
metabolizing, and producing enzymes and hormones,
for example—are well coordinated with
environmental rhythms, but the key question is
whether the animal's schedule is driven by external
cues, such as sunrise or sunset, or is instead
dependent somehow on internal timers that
themselves generate the observed biological rhythms.
Almost universally, biologists accept the idea that all
eukaryotes (a category that includes most organisms
except bacteria and certain algae) have internal clocks.
By isolating organisms completely from external
periodic cues, biologists learned that organisms have
internal clocks. For instance, apparently normal daily
periods of biological activity were maintained for
about a week by the fungus Neurospora when it was
intentionally isolated from all geophysical timing cues
while orbiting in a space shuttle. The continuation of
biological rhythms in an organism without external
cues attests to its having an internal clock.
1.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Stability, a feature of the biological clock's period,
depends on changeable factors such as temperature.
B.A major feature of the biological clock is that its
period does not change despite significant changes in
the environment.
C.A factor such as temperature is an important feature
in the establishment of the biological clock's period.
D.Biological activity is not strongly affected by changes
in temperature.
2.According to paragraph 2, which of the following is
true about the circadian periods of animals deprived
of environmental cues?
A.They have the same length as the daily activity
cycles of animals that are not deprived of such cues.
B.They can vary significantly from day to day.
C.They are not the same for all members of a single
species.
D.They become longer over time.
3. According to paragraph 2, what will an animal
experience when its internal rhythms no longer
correspond with the daily cycle of the environment?
A.Disorientation
B.Change in period of the internal rhythms
C.Reversal of day and night activities increased
D.Sensitivity to environmental factors
When crayfish are kept continuously in the dark, even
for four to five months, their compound eyes continue
to adjust on a daily schedule for daytime and
nighttime vision. Horseshoe crabs kept in the dark
continuously for a year were found to maintain apersistent rhythm of brain activity that similarly
adapts their eyes on a daily schedule for bright or for
weak light. Like almost all daily cycles of animals
deprived of environmental cues, those measured for
the horseshoe crabs in these conditions were not
exactly 24 hours. Such a rhythm whose period is
approximately—but not exactly—a day is called
circadian. For different individual horseshoe crabs, the
circadian period ranged from 22.2 to 25.5 hours. A
particular animal typically maintains its owncharacteristic cycle duration with great precision for
many days. Indeed, stability of the biological clock's
period is one of its major features, even when the
organism's environment is subjected to considerable
changes in factors, such as temperature, that would
be expected to affect biological activity strongly.
Further evidence for persistent internal rhythms
appears when the usual external cycles are
shifted—either experimentally or by rapid east-west
travel over great distances. Typically, the animal's daily
internally generated cycle of activity continues
without change. As a result, its activities are shifted
relative to the external cycle of the new environment.
The disorienting effects of this mismatch between
external time cues and internal schedules may persist,
like our jet lag, for several days or weeks until certain
cues such as the daylight/darkness cycle reset the
organism's clock to synchronize with the daily rhythm
of the new environment.
4.In paragraph 2, the author provides evidence for the
role of biological clocks by
A.listing the daily activities of an animal's cycle:
sleeping, feeding, moving, reproducing, metabolizing,
and producing enzymes and hormones
B.describing the process of establishing the period of a
biological clock
C.presenting cases in which an animal's daily schedule
remained stable despite lack of environmental cues
D.contrasting animals whose daily schedules fluctuate
with those of animals whose schedules are constant5.The word duration in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.length
B.feature
C.process
D.repetition
6.In paragraph 2, why does the author mention that
the period for different horseshoe crabs ranges from
22.2 to 25.5 hours?
A.To illustrate that an animal's internal clock seldom
has a 24-hour cycle
B.To argue that different horseshoe crabs will shift
from daytime to nighttime vision at different times
C.To illustrate the approximate range of the circadian
rhythm of all animals
D.To support the idea that external cues are the only
factors affecting an animal's periodic behavior
7.The word “it”in the passage refers to
A.an external cue such as sunrise
B.the daily rhythm of an animal
C.the local solar day
D.a cycle whose period is precisely 24 hours8. The word “sustained” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.intense
B.uninterrupted
C.natural
D.periodic
Animals need natural periodic signals like sunrise to
maintain a cycle whose period is precisely 24 hours.
Such an external cue not only coordinates an animal's
daily rhythms with particular features of the localsolar day but also—because itnormally does so day
after day-seems to keep the internal clock's period
close to that of Earth's rotation. Yet despite this
synchronization of the period of the internal cycle, the
animal's timer itself continues to have its own
genetically built-in period close to, but different from,
24 hours. Without the external cue, the difference
accumulates and so the internally regulated activities
of the biological day drift continuously, like the tides,
in relation to the solar day. This drift has been studied
extensively in many animals and in biological activities
ranging from the hatching of fruit fly eggs to wheel
running by squirrels. Light has a predominating
influence in setting the clock. Even a fifteen-minuteburst of light in otherwise sustained darkness can
reset an animal's circadian rhythm. Normally, internal
rhythms are kept in step by regular environmental
cycles. For instance, if a homing pigeon is to navigate
with its Sun compass, its clock must be properly set by
cues provided by the daylight/darkness cycle.
Animals need natural periodic signals like sunrise to maintain a cycle whose period is precisely 24 hours. ▌Such
an external cue not only coordinates an animal's daily rhythms with particular features of the local solar day but
also—because it normally does so day after day-seems to keep the internal clock's period close to that of Earth's
rotation. ▌Yet despite this synchronization of the period of the internal cycle, the animal's timer itself continues
to have its own genetically built-in period close to, but different from, 24 hours. ▌Without the external cue, the
difference accumulates and so the internally regulated activities of the biological day drift continuously, like the
tides, in relation to the solar day. ▌This drift has been studied extensively in many animals and in biological
activities ranging from the hatching of fruit fly eggs to wheel running by squirrels. Light has a predominating
influence in setting the clock. Even a fifteen-minute burst of light in otherwise sustained darkness can reset an
animal's circadian rhythm. Normally, internal rhythms are kept in step by regular environmental cycles. For
instance, if a homing pigeon is to navigate with its Sun compass, its clock must be properly set by cues provided by
the daylight/darkness cycle.
9.Look at the four squares [] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
Because the internal signals that regulate waking and going to sleep tend to align themselves with these external
cues, the external clock appears to dominate the internal clock.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The activity of animals is usually coordinated with
periodically recurring events in the environment.
A. Most animals survive and reproduce successfully without coordinating their activities to external environmental
rhythms.
B. The circadian period of an animal's internal clock is genetically determined and basically unchangeable.
C. Environmental cues such as a change in temperature are enough to reset an animal's clock.
D. Animals have internal clocks that influence their activities even when environmental cues are absent.
E. Animals are less affected by large differences between their internal rhythms and the local solar day than are
humans.
F. Because an animal's internal clock does not operate on a 24-hour cycle, environmental stimuli are needed to
keep the biological day aligned with the solar day.
TPO13-3 Methods of Studying Infant Perception
1.Paragraph 1 indicates that researchers use indirect
methods primarily to observe the
A.range of motor activity in neonates
B.frequency and duration of various stimuli
C.change in an infant's state following the introduction
of a stimulus
D.range of an infant's visual field
2.The word uniformly in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.clearly
B.quickly
C.consistently
D.occasionally3. Why does the author mention repetitive following
movements of the eye ? A To identify a response that
indicates a neonate's perception of a stimulus
B.To explain why a neonate is capable of responding to
stimuli only through repetitive movements
C.To argue that motor activity in a neonate may be
random and unrelated to stimuli
D.To emphasize that responses to stimuli vary in
infants according to age
In the study of perceptual abilities of infants, a
number of techniques are used to determine infants'
responses to various stimuli. Because they cannot
verbalize or fill out questionnaires, indirect techniques
of naturalistic observation are used as the primary
means of determining what infants can see, hear, feel,
and so forth. Each of these methods compares an
infant's state prior to the introduction of a stimulus
with its state during or immediately following the
stimulus. The difference between the two measures
provides the researcher with an indication of the level
and duration of the response to the stimulus. Forexample, if a uniformly moving pattern of some sort is
passed across the visual field of a neonate (newborn),
repetitive following movements of the eye occur. The
occurrence of these eye movements provides
evidence that the moving pattern is perceived at some
level by the newborn. Similarly, changes in the infant's
general level of motor activity —turning the head,
blinking the eyes, crying, and so forth — have been
used by researchers as visual indicators of the infant's
perceptual abilities.
4.The word potent in the passage is closest in meaning
to
A.artificial
B.powerful
C.common
D.similar
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information. A
Researchers using observational assessment
techniques on infants must not overgeneralize and
must base their conclusions on data from many
studies.
B.On the basis of the data from one or two studies, it
seems that some infants develop a particular
perceptual ability not observed in others.
C.To use data from one or two studies on infant's
perceptual abilities, it is necessary to use techniques
that will provide conclusive evidence.
D.When researchers fail to make generalizations from
their studies, their observed data is often inconclusive.
Such techniques, however, have limitations. First, the
observation may be unreliable in that two or more
observers may not agree that the particular response
occurred, or to what degree it occurred. Second,
responses are difficult to quantify. Often the rapid and
diffuse movements of the infant make it difficult to get
an accurate record of the number of responses. Thethird, and most potent , limitation is that it is not
possible to be certain that the infant's response was
due to the stimulus presented or to a change from no
stimulus to a stimulus. The infant may be responding
to aspects of the stimulus different than thoseidentified by the investigator. Therefore, when
observational assessment is used as a technique for
studying infant perceptual abilities, care must be
taken not to overgeneralize from the data or to rely
on one or two studies as conclusive evidence of a
particular perceptual ability of the infant.
6.What is the author's primary purpose in paragraph
3?
A.To explain why researchers must conduct more than
one type of study when they are attempting to
understand infant perception
B.To describe new techniques for observing infant
perception that overcome problems identified in the
previous paragraph
C.To present and evaluate the conclusions of various
studies on infant perception
D.To point out the strengths and weaknesses of three
new methods for quantifying an infant's reaction to
stimuli
Observational assessment techniques have become
much more sophisticated, reducing the limitations just
presented. Film analysis of the infant's responses,
heart and respiration rate monitors, and nonnutritive
sucking devices are used as effective tools in
understanding infant perception. Film analysis permits
researchers to carefully study the infant's responses
over and over and in slow motion. Precise
measurements can be made of the length and
frequency of the infant's attention between two
stimuli. Heart and respiration monitors provide the
investigator with the number of heartbeats or breaths
taken when a new stimulus is presented. Numerical
increases are used as quantifiable indicators of
heightened interest in the new stimulus. Increases in
nonnutritive sucking were first used as an assessment
measure by researchers in 1969. They devised an
apparatus that connected a baby's pacifier to a
counting device. As stimuli were presented, changes in
the infant's sucking behavior were recorded. Increases
in the number of sucks were used as an indicator of
the infant's attention to or preference for a given
visual display.
7.According to paragraph 4, which of the following
leads to the conclusion that infants are able to
differentiate between stimuli in a
habituation-dishabituation study?
A.Dishabituation occurs with the introduction of a new
stimulus.
B.Electrical responses in the infant's brain decline with
each new stimulus.
C.Habituation is continued with the introduction of a
new stimulus.
D.The infant displays little change in electrical brain
responses.
8. Paragraph 5 indicates that researchers who used
the techniques described in the passage discovered
that
A.infants find it difficult to perceive some types of
stimuli
B.neonates of only a few days cannot yet discriminate
between stimuli
C.observational assessment is less useful for studying
infant perception than researchers previously believed
D.a neonate is able to perceive stimuli better than
researchers once thought
Two additional techniques of studying infant
perception have come into vogue. The first is the
habituation-dishabituation technique, in which a
single stimulus is presented repeatedly to the infant
until there is a measurable decline (habituation) in
whatever attending behavior is being observed. At
that point a new stimulus is presented, and any
recovery (dishabituation) in responsiveness is
recorded. If the infant fails to dishabituate and
continues to show habituation with the new stimulus,
it is assumed that the baby is unable to perceive the
new stimulus as different. The
habituation-dishabituation paradigm has been used
most extensively with studies of auditory and
olfactory perception in infants. The second technique
relies on evoked potentials, which are electrical brain
responses that may be related to a particular stimulus
because of where they originate. Changes in the
electrical pattern of the brain indicate that the
stimulus is getting through to the infant's central
nervous system and eliciting some form of response.
Each of the preceding techniques provides the
researcher with evidence that the infant can detect or
discriminate between stimuli. With these
sophisticated observational assessment and
electro-physiological measures, we know that the
neonate of only a few days is far more perceptive than
previously suspected. However, these measures are
only "indirect" indicators of the infant's perceptual
abilities.
184Observational assessment techniques have become much more sophisticated, reducing the limitations just
presented. Film analysis of the infant's responses, heart and respiration rate monitors, and nonnutritive sucking
devices are used as effective tools in understanding infant perception. ▌Film analysis permits researchers to
carefully study the infant's responses over and over and in slow motion. ▌Precise measurements can be made of
the length and frequency of the infant's attention between two stimuli. ▌Heart and respiration monitors provide
the investigator with the number of heartbeats or breaths taken when a new stimulus is presented. ▌Numerical
increases are used as quantifiable indicators of heightened interest in the new stimulus. Increases in nonnutritive
sucking were first used as an assessment measure by researchers in 1969. They devised an apparatus that
connected a baby's pacifier to a counting device. As stimuli were presented, changes in the infant's sucking
behavior were recorded. Increases in the number of sucks were used as an indicator of the infant's attention to or
preference for a given visual display.
9. Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? The repetition allows researchers to observe the infant's behavior until they reach
agreement about the presence and the degree of the infant's response.
7.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Researchers use a number of techniques to determine how infants
respond to changes in their environment.
A. Data from observational methods must be confirmed through multiple studies.
B. New techniques for studying infant perception have improved the accuracy with which researchers observe
and quantify infant responses
C. Indirect observation is most accurate when researchers use it to test auditory and olfactory perception in
neonates.
D. Visual indicators such as turning the head, blinking the eyes, or crying remain the best evidence of an infant's
perceptual abilities.
E. Pacifiers are commonly used in studies to calm an infant who has been presented with excessive stimuli.
F. Sophisticated techniques that have aided new discoveries about perception in the neonate continue to be
indirect measures.
TPO14
TPO14-1 Children and Advertisin g
Young children are trusting of commercial
advertisements in the media, and advertisers have
sometimes been accused of taking advantage of this
trusting outlook. The Independent Television
Commission, regulator of television advertising in the
United Kingdom, has criticized advertisers for
"misleadingness"—creating a wrong impression either
intentionally or unintentionally—in an effort to control
advertisers' use of techniques that make it difficult for
children to judge the true size, action, performance, or
construction of a toy.
1. The word “verify” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.establish the truth of
B.approve of
C.understand
D.criticize
2. In paragraph 2, what is one reason that claims such
as “the best” or “better than” can be misleading?
A.They represent the opinions of adults, which are
often different from those of children.
B.They generally involve comparisons among only a
small group of products.
C.They reflect the attitudes of consumer protection
groups rather than those of actual consumers.
D.They reflect the advertiser's viewpoint about the
product.
3. Cereal advertisements that include the statement“when part of a nutritionally balanced breakfast ” are
trying to suggest that
A.the cereal is a desirable part of a healthful, balanced
breakfast
B.the cereal contains equal amounts of all nutrients
C.cereal is a healthier breakfast than other foods are
D.the cereal is the most nutritious part of the
breakfast meal
4. According to paragraph 2, all of the following are
true of disclaimers made in advertisements EXCEPT:
A.They are qualifications or conditions put on a claim.
B.They may be used to balance exaggerations.
C.They are usually presented in both audio and visual
formats.
D.They are often difficult for children to understand.
General concern about misleading tactics that
advertisers employ is centered on the use of
exaggeration. Consumer protection groups and
parents believe that children are largely ill-equipped
to recognize such techniques and that often
exaggeration is used at the expense of productinformation. Claims such as " the best " or " better
than " can be subjective and misleading; even adults
may be unsure as to their meaning. They represent
the advertiser's opinions about the qualities of their
products or brand and, as a consequence, are difficultto verify . Advertisers sometimes offset or
counterbalance an exaggerated claim with a
disclaimer—a qualification or condition on the claim.
For example, the claim that breakfast cereal has a
health benefit may be accompanied by the disclaimer
"when part of a nutritionally balanced breakfast."
However, research has shown that children often have
difficulty understanding disclaimers: children mayinterpret the phrase " when part of a nutritionally
balanced breakfast " to mean that the cereal is
required as a necessary part of a balanced breakfast.
The author George Comstock suggested that less than
a quarter of children between the ages of six and eight
years old understood standard disclaimers used in
many toy advertisements and that disclaimers are
more readily comprehended when presented in both
audio and visual formats. Nevertheless, disclaimers
are mainly presented in audio format only.
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Rational appeals in advertising are certainly limited
by children's emotional immaturity and the indirect
nature of their associations.
B.Indirect appeals to children's psychological states or
associations can limit the effectiveness of rational
appeals in advertising.
C.Rational appeals play a much smaller role in
advertisements for children than emotional appeals
and psychological associations do.
D.Rational appeals in advertising aimed at children
should certainly be limited until the children are
emotionally and psychologically ready.
Fantasy is one of the more common techniques in
advertising that could possibly mislead a young
audience. Child-oriented advertisements are more
likely to include magic and fantasy than
advertisements aimed at adults. In a content analysis
of Canadian television, the author Stephen Kline
observed that nearly all commercials for character
toys featured fantasy play. Children have strong
imaginations and the use of fantasy brings their ideasto life, but children may not be adept enough to
realize that what they are viewing is unreal. Fantasy
situations and settings are frequently used to attract
children's attention, particularly in food advertising.
Advertisements for breakfast cereals have, for many
years, been found to be especially fond of fantasy
techniques, with almost nine out of ten including such
content. Generally, there is uncertainty as to whether
very young children can distinguish between fantasyand reality in advertising. Certainly, rational appeals
in advertising aimed at children are limited, as most
advertisements use emotional and indirect appeals
to psychological states or associations.
6. The word "attributes" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.evaluations
B.attitudes
C.actions
D.characteristics
7. In paragraph 4, why does the author mention a
show about a cartoon lion in which an advertisement
appears featuring the same lion character?
A.To help explain what is meant by the term "host
selling” and why it can be misleading to children
B.To explain why the role of celebrities in advertising
aimed at children has often been confused with host
selling
C.To compare the effectiveness of using animated
figures with the effectiveness of using celebrities in
advertisements aimed at children
D.To indicate how Kunkel first became interested in
studying the effects of host selling on children
8. According to paragraph 5, what did a study of
children in Hong Kong show about the use of
celebrities in advertisements aimed at children?
A.It is most effective with children who watch a lot of
television.
B.It has little effect if the celebrities are not familiar to
most children.
C.It is more effective in marketing cereals and food
products than in marketing other kinds of products.
D.It can have a negative effect if the celebrities are not
popular with children.
The use of celebrities such as singers and movie stars
is common in advertising. The intention is for the
positively perceived attributes of the celebrity to be
transferred to the advertised product and for the two
to become automatically linked in the audience's mind.
In children's advertising, the "celebrities" are often
animated figures from popular cartoons. In the recent
past, the role of celebrities in advertising to children
has often been conflated with the concept of host
selling. Host selling involves blending advertisements
with regular programming in a way that makes it
difficult to distinguish one from the other. Host selling
occurs, for example, when a children's show about a
cartoon lion contains an ad in which the same lion
promotes a breakfast cereal. The psychologist Dale
Kunkel showed that the practice of host selling
reduced children's ability to distinguish between
advertising and program material. It was also found
that older children responded more positively to
products in host selling advertisements.
Regarding the appearance of celebrities in
advertisements that do not involve host selling, the
evidence is mixed. Researcher Charles Atkin found
that children believe that the characters used to
advertise breakfast cereals are knowledgeable about
cereals, and children accept such characters
as credible sources of nutritional information. This
finding was even more marked for heavy viewers of
television. In addition, children feel validated in their
choice of a product when a celebrity endorses that
product. A study of children in Hong Kong, however,
found that the presence of celebrities in
advertisements could negatively affect the children's
perceptions of a product if the children did not like the
celebrity in question.
189▌Fantasy is one of the more common techniques in advertising that could possibly mislead a young
audience. ▌Child-oriented advertisements are more likely to include magic and fantasy than advertisements
aimed at adults. ▌In a content analysis of Canadian television, the author Stephen Kline observed that nearly all
commercials for character toys featured fantasy play. ▌Children have strong imaginations and the use of fantasy
brings their ideas to life, but children may not be adept enough to realize that what they are viewing is unreal.
Fantasy situations and settings are frequently used to attract children's attention, particularly in food advertising.
Advertisements for breakfast cereals have, for many years, been found to be especially fond of fantasy techniques,
with almost nine out of ten including such content. Generally, there is uncertainty as to whether very young
children can distinguish between fantasy and reality in advertising. Certainly, rational appeals in advertising aimed
at children are limited, as most advertisements use emotional and indirect appeals to psychological states or
associations.
9. Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
Another aspect of advertising that may especially influence children is fantasy.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Advertisers sometimes use strategies that can mislead children.
A. Children may not be able to interpret exaggerated claims made by advertisers or understand the disclaimers
used to offset claims.
B. Although the use of celebrities is not necessarily effective in advertisements aimed at children, there is
evidence that host selling can positively affect their views of a product.
C. Studies show that misleading tactics are used most often in commercials for breakfast cereals, with toy
commercials using such tactics only slightly less frequently.
D. The use of fantasy is especially common in advertisements for children, but children may not be able to
distinguish fantasy from reality.
E. Very young children are particularly influenced by host selling, while slightly older children are more readily
misled by seemingly rational claims such as "the best."
F. Advertisements can be misleading to children when the advertisements use audio and visual formats that are
especially appealing to children.
TPO14-2 Maya Water Problems
1. Why does the author call the Mayan homeland both
a “seasonal tropical forest ” and " seasonal desert ”?
A.To illustrate how the climate of the Mayan
homeland varied from region to region
B.To explain how the climate of the Mayan homeland
is similar to that of a jungle or tropical rainforest
C.To emphasize the vast size of the area that
comprised the Mayan homeland in ancient times
D.To make the point that the Mayan homeland is
climatically more complex than is generally assumed
2. Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 2 as a difference between the northern and
southern Yucatan Peninsula?
A.The annual rainfall was greater in the south.
B.The population density was lower in the north.
C.Agricultural productivity was greater in the south
D.Rainfall was more unpredictable and variable in the
south.
3. Which of the following statements about ancient
and modem agriculture in the Yucatan Peninsula is
supported by paragraph 2?
A.Modern agricultural methods have solved many of
the ancient problems of farming in the Yucatan
Peninsula.
B.Ancient Mayan farmers may have been somewhat
more successful at farming in the Yucatan Peninsula
than farmers are today.
C.Farming today is easier than in the past because
environmental changes in the Yucatan Peninsula have
increased available rainfall
D.The Yucatan soils in which ancient farmers worked
To understand the ancient Mayan people who lived in
the area that is today southern Mexico and Central
America and the ecological difficulties they faced, one
must first consider their environment, which we think
of as "jungle" or "tropical rainforest." This view is
inaccurate, and the reason proves to be important.
Properly speaking, tropical rainforests grow in
high-rainfall equatorial areas that remain wet or
humid all year round. But the Maya homeland lies
more than sixteen hundred kilometers from the
equator, at latitudes 17 to 22 degrees north, in a
habitat termed a "seasonal tropical forest." That is,
while there does tend to be a rainy season from May
to October, there is also a dry season from January
through April. If one focuses on the wet months, onecalls the Maya homeland a " seasonal tropical forest ";
if one focuses on the dry months, one could instead
describe it as a " seasonal desert ."
From north to south in the Yucatan Peninsula, where
the Maya lived, rainfall ranges from 18 to 100 inches
(457 to 2,540 millimeters) per year, and the soils
become thicker, so that the southern peninsula was
agriculturally more productive and supported denser
populations. But rainfall in the Maya homeland is
unpredictably variable between years; some recent
years have had three or four times more rain than
other years. As a result, modern farmers attempting to
grow corn in the ancient Maya homelands have faced
frequent crop failures, especially in the north. The
ancient Maya were presumably more experienced and
did better, but nevertheless they too must have faced
risks of crop failures from droughts and hurricanes.
191were richer, more productive, and thicker than they
are today.
4. The word “paradoxically ” in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.usually
B.surprisingly
C.understandably
D.predictably5. The phrase “The likely explanation” in the passage
refers to the explanation for why
A.the southern Maya areas received more rainfall than
the northern areas
B.modern archaeologists have difficulty understanding
ancient droughts
C.water problems were most severe in the wet south
D.land surface in the south is so high above the water
table
6.Which of the following statements about the
availability of water in the Mayan homeland is
supported by paragraph 3?
A.The construction of wells was an uncommon
practice in both the north and the south because it
was too difficult to dig through the karst.
B.In most areas in the north and the south, rainwater
was absorbed directly into the porous karst.
C.The water table was an important resource for
agriculture in both the north and the south of the
Yucatan Peninsula.
D.The lack of surface water in both the north and the
south was probably due to the fact that most of it was
quickly used up for agricultural purposes.
Although southern Maya areas received more rainfall
than northern areas, problems of water
were paradoxically more severe in the wet south.
While that made things hard for ancient Maya living in
the south, it has also made things hard for modern
archaeologists who have difficulty understanding why
ancient droughts caused bigger problems in the wetsouth than in the dry north. The likely explanation is
that an area of underground freshwater underlies the
Yucatan Peninsula, but surface elevation increases
from north to south, so that as one moves south the
land surface lies increasingly higher above the water
table. In the northern peninsula the elevation is
sufficiently low that the ancient Maya were able to
reach the water table at deep sinkholes called cenotes,
or at deep caves. In low-elevation north coastal areas
without sinkholes, the Maya would have been able to
get down to the water table by digging wells up to 75
feet (22 meters) deep. But much of the south lies too
high above the water table for cenotes or wells to
reach down to it. Making matters worse, most of the
Yucatan Peninsula consists of karst, a porous
sponge-like limestone terrain where rain runs straight
into the ground and where little or no surface water
remains available.
7. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Southern Maya populations obtained the water they
needed for the dry season by collecting and storing
rainwater in sealed depressions.
B.The Maya are credited with creating methods for
modifying natural rainwater and storing it.
C.Leaks in the karst caused difficulties in the creation
of reservoirs, which were needed to store water for
the dry season.
D.Southern Mayans were more successful at collecting
rain than storing it during dry seasons.
8. What can be inferred from paragraph 4 about how
residents of Tikal met their needs for water and food
during most periods of drought?
A.They depended upon water and food that had been
stored for use during the dry season.
B.They obtained drinking water and water for crop
irrigation from Coba dikes.
C.They located their population centers near a lake
where water was available for drinking and watering
crops.
D.They moved locations every 18 months to find new
croplands and water sources.
How did those dense southern Maya populations deal
with the resulting water problem? It initially surprises
us that many of their cities were not built next to the
rivers but instead on high terrain in rollinguplands. The explanation is that the Maya excavated
depressions, or modified natural depressions, and
then plugged up leaks in the karst by plastering the
bottoms of the depressions in order to create
reservoirs, which collected rain from large plastered
catchment basins and stored it for use in the dry
season. For example, reservoirs at the Maya city of
Tikal held enough water to meet the drinking water
needs of about 10,000 people for a period of 18
months. At the city of Coba the Maya built dikes
around a lake in order to raise its level and make their
water supply more reliable. But the inhabitants of
Tikal and other cities dependent on reservoirs for
drinking water would still have been in deep trouble if
18 months passed without rain in a prolonged drought.
A.shorter drought in which they exhausted their
stored food supplies might already have gotten them
in deep trouble, because growing crops required rain
rather than reservoirs.
193To understand the ancient Mayan people who lived in the area that is today southern Mexico and Central America
and the ecological difficulties they faced, one must first consider their environment, which we think of as "jungle"
or "tropical rainforest." ▌This view is inaccurate, and the reason proves to be important. ▌Properly speaking,
tropical rainforests grow in high-rainfall equatorial areas that remain wet or humid all year round. But the Maya
homeland lies more than sixteen hundred kilometers from the equator, at latitudes 17 to 22 degrees north, in a
habitat termed a "seasonal tropical forest." ▌That is, while there does tend to be a rainy season from May to
October, there is also a dry season from January through April. If one focuses on the wet months, one calls the
Maya homeland a "seasonal tropical forest"; if one focuses on the dry months, one could instead describe it as a
"seasonal desert." ▌
9. Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
The difference between the two climates challenged the Maya who had to deal with both.
10. Directions: Select from the seven phrases below the phrases that correctly characterize the southern Mayan
homeland and the phrases that correctly characterize the northern Mayan homeland. Drag each phrase you
select into the appropriate column of the table. Two of the phrases will NOT be used. This question is worth 3
points.
A. City of Tikal
B. Predictable rainfall
C. High above water table
D. Used reservoirs
E. Obtained water from wells
F. Dramatically improved corn crops
G. Had comparatively thin layer of soil
TPO14-3 Pastoralism in Ancient Inner Eurasia
1. The word “prestige ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.interest
B.status
C.demand
D.profit
Pastoralism is a lifestyle in which economic activity is
based primarily on livestock. Archaeological evidence
suggests that by 3000 B.C., and perhaps even earlier,
there had emerged on the steppes of Inner Eurasia the
distinctive types of pastoralism that were to dominate
the region's history for several millennia. Here, the
horse was already becoming the animal of prestige in
many regions, though sheep, goats, and cattle could
also play a vital role. It is the use of horses for
transportation and warfare that explains why Inner
Eurasian pastoralism proved the most mobile and the
most militaristic of all major forms of pastoralism. The
emergence and spread of pastoralism had a profound
impact on the history of Inner Eurasia, and also,
indirectly, on the parts of Asia and Europe just outside
this area. In particular, pastoralism favors a mobile
lifestyle, and this mobility helps to explain the impact
of pastoralist societies on this part of the world.
2. In paragraph 2, why does the author contrast
pastoralists with agriculturalists?
A.To explain why pastoralism requires more land than
agriculturalism to support basic needs
B.To identify some advantages that mobile societies
have over immobile societies
C.To demonstrate that ecological principles that apply
to pastoralism do not apply to agriculturalism
D.To argue that agriculturalism eventually developed
out of pastoralism
3. According to paragraph 2, pastoralists tend to
A.prefer grazing their animals on agricultural lands
B.consume comparatively large amounts of food and
clothing
C.avoid eating plant foods
D.move from place to place frequently
The mobility of pastoralist societies reflects their
dependence on animal-based foods. While
agriculturalists rely on domesticated plants,
pastoralists rely on domesticated animals. As a result,
pastoralists, like carnivores in general, occupy a higher
position on the food chain. All else being equal, this
means they must exploit larger areas of land than do
agriculturalists to secure the same amount of food,
clothing, and other necessities. So pastoralism is a
more extensive lifeway than farming is. However, the
larger the terrain used to support a group, the harder
it is to exploit that terrain while remaining in one
place. So, basic ecological principles imply a strong
tendency within pastoralist lifeways toward nomadism
(a mobile lifestyle). As the archaeologist Roger Cribb
puts it, “The greater the degree of pastoralism, the
stronger the tendency toward nomadism.” A modern
Turkic nomad interviewed by Cribb commented: "The
more animals you have, the farther you have to
move."
4. In paragraph 3, why does the author discuss
languages spoken in the region spanning from Eastern
Europe to the western borders of Mongolia?
A.To emphasize the frequency with which
Indo-European languages changed as a result of the
mobile nature of pastoralism
B.To indicate one method linguists use to determine
that inhabitants of the Don and Dnieper river area had
taken up stock breeding
C.To provide evidence that Indo-European languages
have their roots in what is now Turkey
D.To provide evidence that pastoralist societies can
exercise cultural influence over a large area5. The word "striking ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.reliable
B.noticeable
C.convincing
D.violent
Nomadism has further consequences. It means that
pastoralist societies occupy and can influence very
large territories. This is particularly true of the horse
pastoralism that emerged in the Inner Eurasian
steppes, for this was the most mobile of all major
forms of pastoralism. So, it is no accident that with the
appearance of pastoralist societies there appear large
areas that share similar cultural, ecological, and even
linguistic features. By the late fourth millennium B.C.,
there is already evidence of large culture zones
reaching from Eastern Europe to the western bordersof Mongolia. Perhaps the most striking sign of
mobility is the fact that by the third millennium B.C.,
most pastoralists in this huge region spoke related
languages ancestral to the modern Indo-European
languages. The remarkable mobility and range of
pastoral societies explain, in part, why so many
linguists have argued that the Indo-European
languages began their astonishing expansionist career
not among farmers in Anatolia (present-day Turkey),
but among early pastoralists from Inner Eurasia. Such
theories imply that the Indo-European languages
evolved not in Neolithic (10,000 to 3,000 B.C.)
Anatolia, but among the foraging communities of the
cultures in the region of the Don and Dnieper rivers,
which took up stock breeding and began to exploit the
neighboring steppes.
6. According to paragraph 4, the fact that pastoralist
communities are subject to “ strict rules of portability ”
encourages such communities to
A.relocate less frequently than they would otherwise
B.have households that are more or less equal in
wealth
C.become self-sufficient in the manufacture of silk and
jewelry
D.share large material surpluses with neighboring
communities
7. According to paragraph 4, all of the following are
true of social inequality in pastoralist societies EXCEPT:
A.It exists and has existed to some degree in most
pastoral societies.
B.It is most marked during periods of military
conquest.
C.It is expressed in the form of a rigid hierarchy based
largely on heredity.
D.It is usually too insignificant to be discussed in terms
of class differences.
8. Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Despite the fact that wealth is relatively evenly
distributed in pastoral societies, gender inequality still
exists because only men can acquire military skills and
social status.
B.Inequalities of gender existed in pastoralist societies
until most communities began to require women to
possess the same skills as men and take part in the
military.
C.Inequalities of gender in pastoralist societies were
caused by steep hierarchies of wealth and differences
in military training between men and women.
D.In pastoral societies, gender inequality is
comparatively mild because wealth is relatively evenly
distributed and women have to learn most of the
same skills that men do.
Nomadism also subjects pastoralist communities
tostrict rules of portability . If you are constantly on
the move, you cannot afford to accumulate large
material surpluses. Such rules limit variations in
accumulated material goods between pastoralist
households (though they may also encourage a taste
for portable goods of high value such as silks or
jewelry). So, by and large, nomadism implies a high
degree of self-sufficiency and inhibits the appearance
of an extensive division of labor. Inequalities of wealth
and rank certainly exist, and have probably existed in
most pastoralist societies, but except in periods of
military conquest, they are normally too slight to
generate the stable, hereditary hierarchies that are
usually implied by the use of the term class.
Inequalities of gender have also existed in pastoralist
societies, but they seem to have been softened by
the absence of steep hierarchies of wealth in most
communities, and also by the requirement that
women acquire most of the skills of men, including,
often, their military skills.
198Nomadism also subjects pastoralist communities to strict rules of portability. ▌If you are constantly on the move,
you cannot afford to accumulate large material surpluses. ▌Such rules limit variations in accumulated material
goods between pastoralist households (though they may also encourage a taste for portable goods of high value
such as silks or jewelry). ▌So, by and large, nomadism implies a high degree of self-sufficiency and inhibits the
appearance of an extensive division of labor. Inequalities of wealth and rank certainly exist, and have probably
existed in most pastoralist societies, but except in periods of military conquest, they are normally too slight to
generate the stable, hereditary hierarchies that are usually implied by the use of the term class. ▌Inequalities of
gender have also existed in pastoralist societies, but they seem to have been softened by the absence of steep
hierarchies of wealth in most communities, and also by the requirement that women acquire most of the skills of
men, including, often, their military skills.
9. Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
There is a good reason for this.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences
do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in
the passage. This question is worth 2 points. By 3000 B.C., a distinctive form of pastoralism had appeared on the
steppes of Inner Eurasia.
A. The domesticated horse is primarily responsible for Inner Eurasian pastoralism's success in mobility and
warfare.
B. As pastoralists traveled across large areas of terrain with their domesticated animals, they traded valuable
material goods such as silks and jewelry.
C. Because pastoralists are highly mobile, they tend to have few material possessions and can influence the
culture, ecology, and language of very large areas.
D. Because pastoralism requires a great deal of land to support its animal-based lifeway, pastoralists must
continually relocate and have comparatively egalitarian societies.
E. Most scholars now believe that Indo-European languages probably evolved during the Neolithic period in the
region of the Don and Dnieper rivers.
F. Pastoralist communities do not have social classes in the usual sense because they value spiritual attainment
over material wealth.
TPO15
TPO15-1 A Warm Blooded Turtle
1.What can be inferred about whales from paragraph
1?
A.They are considered by some to be reptiles.
B.Their bodies are built in a way that helps them
manage extremely cold temperatures.
C.They are distantly related to leatherback turtles.
D.They can swim farther than leatherback turtles.
2.The word “feat” in the passage is closest in meaning
to
A.remarkable achievement
B.common transformation
C.daily activity
D.complex solution
3.Paragraph 2 mentions all of the following as true
about the body heat of adult leatherback turtles
EXCEPT:
A.Their muscles produce heat for maintaining body
temperature.
B.Their dark bodies help trap solar radiation.
C.Their cellular metabolism produces heat as a
by-product.
D.Basking at the water's surface helps them obtain
heat.
When it comes to physiology, the leatherback turtle is,
in some ways, more like a reptilian whale than a turtle.
It swims farther into the cold of the northern and
southern oceans than any other sea turtle, and it
deals with the chilly waters in a way unique among
reptiles.
A.warm-blooded turtle may seem to be a
contradiction in terms. Nonetheless, an adult
leatherback can maintain a body temperature of
between 25 and 26°C (77-79°F) in seawater that isonly 8°C (46.4°F). Accomplishing this feat requires
adaptations both to generate heat in the turtle's body
and to keep it from escaping into the surrounding
waters. Leatherbacks apparently do not generate
internal heat the way we do, or the way birds do, as a
by-product of cellular metabolism. A leatherback may
be able to pick up some body heat by basking at the
surface; its dark, almost black body color may help it
to absorb solar radiation. However, most of its internal
heat comes from the action of its muscles.
4.The word “it” in paragraph 4 refers to
A.the problem
B.blood
C.the turtle
D.body temperature
5.According to paragraph 4, which of the following
features enables the leatherback turtle to stay warm?
A.An insulating layer of blubber
B.A thick, oily skin covering fatty tissue
C.The aerodynamic shape of its flippers
D.A well-insulated head
Leatherbacks keep their body heat in three different
ways. The first, and simplest, is size. The bigger the
animal is, the lower its surface-to-volume ratio; for
every ounce of body mass, there is proportionately
less surface through which heat can escape. An adult
leatherback is twice the size of the biggest cheloniid
sea turtles and will therefore take longer to cool off.
Maintaining a high body temperature through sheer
bulk is called gigantothermy. It works for elephants,
for whales, and, perhaps, it worked for many of the
larger dinosaurs. It apparently works, in a smaller way,
for some other sea turtles. Large loggerhead and
green turtles can maintain their body temperature at
a degree or two above that of the surrounding water,
and gigantothermy is probably the way they do it.
Muscular activity helps, too, and an actively swimming
green turtle may be 7°C (12.6°F) warmer than the
waters it swims through.
Gigantothermy, though, would not be enough to keep
a leatherback warm in cold northern waters. It is not
enough for whales, which supplement it with a thick
layer of insulating blubber (fat). Leatherbacks do not
have blubber, but they do have a reptilian equivalent:
thick, oil-saturated skin, with a layer of fibrous, fatty
tissue just beneath it. Insulation protects the
leatherback everywhere but on its head and flippers.
Because the flippers are comparatively thin and
blade-like, they are the one part of the leatherback
that is likely to become chilled. There is not much that
the turtle can do about this without compromising the
aerodynamic shape of the flipper. The problem is that
as blood flows through the turtle's flippers, it risks
losing enough heat to lower the animal's central bodytemperature when itreturns. The solution is to allow
the flippers to cool down without drawing heat away
from the rest of the turtle's body. The leatherback
accomplishes this by arranging the blood vessels in
the base of its flipper into a countercurrent exchange
system.
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.In a turtle's countercurrent exchange system,
outgoing vessels lie near enough to ingoing ones that
heat can be exchanged from the former to the latter
before reaching the turtle's flippers.
B.Within the turtle's flippers, there is a countercurrent
exchange system that allows colder blood vessels to
absorb heat from nearby warmer blood vessels and
then return warmed blood to the turtle's body.
C.In a countercurrent exchange system, a turtle can
pick up body heat from being close enough to other
turtles, thus raising its blood temperature as it passes
them.
D.When a turtle places its flippers close to its body, it
is able to use its countercurrent exchange system to
transfer heat from the warmer blood vessels in its
body to the cooler blood vessels in its flippers.
7.Why does the author mention old-fashioned steam
radiator in the discussion of countercurrent exchange
systems?
A.To argue that a turtle's central heating system is not
as highly evolved as that of other warmblooded
animals
B.To provide a useful comparison with which to
illustrate how a countercurrent exchange system
works
C.To suggest that steam radiators were modeled after
the sophisticated heating system of turtles
D.To establish the importance of the movement of
water in countercurrent exchange systems
In a countercurrent exchange system, the blood
vessels carrying cooled blood from the flippers run
close enough to the blood vessels carrying warm
blood from the body to pick up some heat from the
warmer blood vessels; thus, the heat is transferred
from the outgoing to the ingoing vessels before it
reaches the flipper itself. This is the same
arrangement found in an old-fashioned steam radiator,
in which the coiled pipes pass heat back and forth as
water courses through them. The leatherback is
certainly not the only animal with such an
arrangement; gulls have a countercurrent exchange in
their legs. That is why a gull can stand on an ice floe
without freezing.
8.According to paragraph 6, which of the following
statements is most accurate about young leatherback
turtles?
A.They lack the countercurrent exchange systems that
develop in adulthood.
B.Their rate of growth is slower than that of other sea
turtles.
C.They lose heat easily even with insulation and
countercurrent exchange systems.
D.They switch between cold-blooded and
warm-blooded modes throughout their hatchling
stage.
All this applies, of course, only to an adult leatherback.
Hatchlings are simply too small to conserve body heat,
even with insulation and countercurrent exchange
systems. We do not know how old, or how large, a
leatherback has to be before it can switch from a
cold-blooded to a warm-blooded mode of life.
Leatherbacks reach their immense size in a much
shorter time than it takes other sea turtles to grow.
Perhaps their rush to adulthood is driven by a simple
need to keep warm.
Leatherbacks keep their body heat in three different ways. The first, and simplest, is size. The bigger the animal is,
the lower its surface-to-volume ratio; for every ounce of body mass, there is proportionately less surface through
which heat can escape. An adult leatherback is twice the size of the biggest cheloniid sea turtles and will thereforetake longer to cool off. Maintaining a high body temperature through sheer bulk is called gigantothermy. It
works for elephants, for whales, and, perhaps, it worked for many of the larger dinosaurs. It apparently works,
in a smaller way, for some other sea turtles. Large loggerhead and green turtles can maintain their body
temperature at a degree or two above that of the surrounding water, and gigantothermy is probably the way theydo it. Muscular activity helps, too, and an actively swimming green turtle may be 7°C (12.6°F) warmer than the
waters it swims through.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
However, these animals have additional means of staying warm.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Contrary to what we would expect of reptiles, the
leatherback turtle is actually warm-blooded.
A. Even though they swim into cold ocean waters, leatherbacks maintain their body heat in much the same way as
sea turtles in warm southern oceans do.
B. The leatherback turtle uses a countercurrent exchange system in order to keep the flippers from drawing heat
away from the rest of the body.
C. The shape of the leatherback turtle's flippers is especially important in maintaining heat in extremely cold
northern waters.
D. The leatherback turtle is able to maintain body heat through sheer size.
E. Leatherbacks have an insulating layer that can be considered the reptilian version of blubber.
F. Young leatherbacks often do not survive to adulthood because they are not able to switch from a cold-blooded
way of life to a warm-blooded one quickly enough.
TPO15-2 Mass Extinctions
1.Paragraph 1 supports which of the following
statements about mass extinctions?
A.They take place over a period of 70 million years.
B.They began during the Cretaceous period.
C.They eliminate many animal species that exist at the
time they occur.
D.They occur every 250 million years.
2.According to paragraph 2, scientists base their belief
that a mass extinction is going on at present on which
of the following?
A.The speed with which mass extinctions are
happening today is similar to the speed of past
extinctions.
B.The number of species that have died out since the
last extinction event is extremely large.
C.Mass extinctions occur with regularity and it is time
for another one.
D.Fossil records of many marine species have
disappeared.
Cases in which many species become extinct within a
geologically short interval of time are called mass
extinctions. There was one such event at the end of
the Cretaceous period (around 70 million years ago).
There was another, even larger, mass extinction at the
end of the Permian period (around 250 million years
ago). The Permian event has attracted much less
attention than other mass extinctions because mostly
unfamiliar species perished at that time.
The fossil record shows at least five mass extinctions
in which many families of marine organisms died out.
The rates of extinction happening today are as great
as the rates during these mass extinctions. Many
scientists have therefore concluded that a sixth great
mass extinction is currently in progress.
3.The word extended in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.specific
B.unlimited
C.reasonable
D.long
4.According to paragraph 3, each of the following has
been proposed as a possible cause of mass extinctions
EXCEPT
A.habitat destruction
B.continental movement
C.fierce interspecies competition
D.changes in Earth's temperature
5.Paragraph 3 supports which of the following ideas
about mass extinctions?
A.Scientists know the exact causes of most mass
extinctions.
B.Mass extinctions are unlikely to happen again in the
future.
C.Insects, flowering plants, and bottom-feeding
predators in the oceans tend to be the first organisms
to disappear during episodes of mass extinctions.
D.Some mass extinctions occurred on land and in the
seas at the same time.
What could cause such high rates of extinction? There
are several hypotheses, including warming or cooling
of Earth, changes in seasonal fluctuations or ocean
currents, and changing positions of the continents.
Biological hypotheses include ecological changes
brought about by the evolution of cooperation
between insects and flowering plants or of
bottom-feeding predators in the oceans. Some of the
proposed mechanisms required a very brief period
during which all extinctions suddenly took place; other
mechanisms would be more likely to have taken placemore gradually, over an extended period, or at
different times on different continents. Some
hypotheses fail to account for simultaneous
extinctions on land and in the seas. Each mass
extinction may have had a different cause. Evidence
points to hunting by humans and habitat destruction
as the likely causes for the current mass extinction.
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Based on their studies of extinction rates of
numerous fossil groups, paleontologists David Raup
and John Sepkoski have determined that mass
extinctions occur about every 26 million years.
B.David Raup and John Sepkoski studied extinction
rates of numerous fossil groups and suggest that mass
extinctions during the Cretaceous period continued
for 26 million years.
C.Studies that paleontologists David Raup and John
Sepkoski conducted of various fossil groups have
revealed that extinction rates have increased over the
past 26 million years.
D.The studies conducted by paleontologists David
Raup and John Sepkoski of the fossil remains of
species suggest that the extinction rate of species
started to increase by the middle of the Cretaceous
period.
7.According to paragraph 4, what aspect of extinction
episodes does the companion-star hypothesis
supposedly clarify?
A.Their location
B.Their frequency
C.Their duration
D.Their severity
American paleontologists David Raup and John
Sepkoski, who have studied extinction rates in a
number of fossil groups, suggest that episodes of
increased extinction have recurred periodically,
approximately every 26 million years since the
mid-Cretaceous period. The late Cretaceous extinction
of the dinosaurs and ammonoids was just one of the
more drastic in a whole series of such recurrent
extinction episodes. The possibility that mass
extinctions may recur periodically has given rise to
such hypotheses as that of a companion star with a
long-period orbit deflecting other bodies from their
normal orbits, making some of them fall to Earth as
meteors and causing widespread devastation upon
impact.
8.In stating that no asteroid itself has ever been
recovered, the author emphasizes which of the
following?
A.The importance of the indirect evidence for a large
asteroid
B.The fact that no evidence supports the asteroid
impact hypothesis
C.The reason many researchers reject the Alvarez
hypothesis
D.The responsibility of scientists for not making the
effort to discover the asteroid itself
Of the various hypotheses attempting to account for
the late Cretaceous extinctions, the one that has
attracted the most attention in recent years is the
asteroid-impact hypothesis first suggested by Luis and
Walter Alvarez. According to this hypothesis, Earth
collided with an asteroid with an estimated diameter
of 10 kilometers, or with several asteroids, the
combined mass of which was comparable. The force
of collision spewed large amounts of debris into the
atmosphere, darkening the skies for several years
before the finer particles settled. The reduced level of
photosynthesis led to a massive decline in plant life of
all kinds, and this caused massive starvation first of
herbivores and subsequently of carnivores. The mass
extinction would have occurred very suddenly under
this hypothesis.
One interesting test of the Alvarez hypothesis is based
on the presence of the rare-earth element iridium (Ir).
Earth's crust contains very little of this element, but
most asteroids contain a lot more. Debris thrown into
the atmosphere by an asteroid collision would
presumably contain large amounts of iridium, and
atmospheric currents would carry this material all
over the globe. A search of sedimentary deposits that
span the boundary between the Cretaceous and
Tertiary periods shows that there is a dramatic
increase in the abundance of iridium briefly and
precisely at this boundary. This iridium anomaly offers
strong support for the Alvarez hypothesis even thoughno asteroid itself has ever been recovered.
208An asteroid of this size would be expected to leave an
immense crater, even if the asteroid itself was
disintegrated by the impact. The intense heat of the
impact would produce heat-shocked quartz in many
types of rock. Also, large blocks thrown aside by the
impact would form secondary craters surrounding the
main crater. To date, several such secondary craters
have been found along Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula,
and heat-shocked quartz has been found both in
Mexico and in Haiti. A location called Chicxulub, along
the Yucatan coast, has been suggested as the primary
impact site.
Cases in which many species become extinct within a geologically short interval of time are called mass
extinctions. There was one such event at the end of the Cretaceous period (around 70 million years ago). ▍
There was another, even larger, mass extinction at the end of the Permian period (around 250 million years ago).
▌The Permian event has attracted much less attention than other mass extinctions because mostly unfamiliar
species perished at that time.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
In general, it is believed that these two extinctions resulted from drastic environmental changes that followed
meteorite impacts or massive volcanic eruptions.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. There have been many attempts to explain the causes
of mass extinctions.
A. Asteroid impacts, evolutionary developments, and changes in Earth's climate and in the positions of the
continents have all been proposed as possible causes of mass extinctions.
B. Researchers have observed 26-million-year cycles in extinction rates of a number of fossil groups that could all
be attributed to the same cause.
C. According to the Alvarez hypothesis, much of the iridium originally present on Earth was thrown into the
atmosphere as a result of an asteroid impact that also caused a mass extinction.
D. The unusual distribution of iridium on Earth and the presence of craters and heat-shocked quartz are central to
the theory that an asteroid impact caused the late Cretaceous event.
E. The collision between Earth and a large asteroid resulted in massive damage and generated enough heat to
cause irreversible changes in Earth's atmosphere.
F. There was a particularly large mass extinction that occurred around 250 million years ago at the end of the
Permian period, whose cause could not be determined.
TPO15-3 Glacier Formation
1.The word “interlocked” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.intermediate
B.linked
C.frozen
D.fully developed
2.According to paragraph 1, which of the following
does NOT describe a stage in the development of firn?
A.Hexagonal crystals become larger and interlock to
form a thick layer.
B.Snow crystals become compacted into grains.
C.Granules recrystallize after melting, refreezing, and
further compaction.
D.Grains become denser owing to reduced air space
around them.
Glaciers are slowly moving masses of ice that have
accumulated on land in areas where more snowfalls
during a year than melts. Snow falls as hexagonal
crystals, but once on the ground, snow is soon
transformed into a compacted mass of smaller,
rounded grains. As the air space around them is
lessened by compaction and melting, the grains
become denser. With further melting, refreezing, and
increased weight from newer snowfall above, the
snow reaches a granular recrystallized stage
intermediate between flakes and ice known as firn.
With additional time, pressure, and refrozen
meltwater from above, the small firn granules becomelarger, interlocked crystals of blue glacial ice. When
the ice is thick enough, usually over 30 meters, the
weight of the snow and firn will cause the ice crystals
toward the bottom to become plastic and to flow
outward or downward from the area of snow
accumulation.
3.According to paragraph 2, surplus snow affects a
glacier in all the following ways EXCEPT:
A.It provides the pressure needed to cause glacial ice
to flow.
B.It offsets losses of ice due to melting, evaporation,
and calving.
C.It brings about the formation of firn in the snow it
buries.
D.It results in temperate glaciers that are thicker than
polar glaciers.
4.Paragraph 2 implies that which of the following
conditions produces the fastest moving glaciers?
A.A climate characteristic of the polar regions
B.A thick layer of ice in a temperate climate
C.Long, warm summers
D.Snow, firn, and ice that have been buried for several
years
Glaciers are open systems, with snow as the system's
input and meltwater as the system's main output. The
glacial system is governed by two basic climatic
variables: precipitation and temperature. For a glacier
to grow or maintain its mass, there must be sufficient
snowfall to match or exceed the annual loss through
melting, evaporation, and calving, which occurs when
the glacier loses solid chunks as icebergs to the sea or
to large lakes. If summer temperatures are high for
too long, then all the snowfall from the previous
winter will melt. Surplus snowfall is essential for a
glacier to develop. A surplus allows snow to
accumulate and for the pressure of snow accumulated
over the years to transform buried snow into glacial
ice with a depth great enough for the ice to flow.
Glaciers are sometimes classified by temperature as
faster-flowing temperate glaciers or as slower-flowing
polar glaciers.
5.The word “deceiving” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.approximate
B.exaggerated
C.unusual
D.misleading
6.Why does the author consider the hypothetical
melting of the world's glaciers?
A.To contrast the effects of this event with the
opposite effects of a new ice age
B.To emphasize how much water is frozen in glaciers
C.To illustrate the disastrous effects of a warming
trend
D.To support the claim that glaciers are part of Earth's
hydrologic cycle
7.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.As a glacier moves, it leaves behind rock formations
that have been engulfed, pushed, and dragged by the
glacier.
B.Glaciers reshape the landscape by carving into rock
and transporting the resulting debris to distant
locations.
C.Glaciers carve the hardest rock formations with
great energy and slowly reshape them into debris.
D.The tremendous energy of slowly moving glaciers
transports and finally deposits rock debris into large
rock formations.
Glaciers are part of Earth's hydrologic cycle and are
second only to the oceans in the total amount of
water contained. About 2 percent of Earth's water is
currently frozen as ice. Two percent may be adeceiving figure, however, since over 80 percent of
the world's freshwater is locked up as ice in glaciers,
with the majority of it in Antarctica. The total amount
of ice is even more awesome if we estimate the waterreleased upon the hypothetical melting of the world's
glaciers. Sea level would rise about 60 meters. This
would change the geography of the planet
considerably. In contrast, should another ice age occur,
sea level would drop drastically. During the last ice age,
sea level dropped about 120 meters.
When snowfalls on high mountains or in polar regions,
it may become part of the glacial system. Unlike rain,
which returns rapidly to the sea or atmosphere, the
snow that becomes part of a glacier is involved in a
much more slowly cycling system. Here water may be
stored in ice form for hundreds or even hundreds of
thousands of years before being released again into
the liquid water system as meltwater. In the meantime,however, this ice is not static. Glaciers move slowly
across the land with tremendous energy, carving into
even the hardest rock formations and thereby
reshaping the landscape as they engulf, push, drag,
and finally deposit rock debris in places far from its
original location. As a result, glaciers create a great
variety of landforms that remain long after the surface
is released from its icy covering.
8.According to paragraph 5, in what way is the present
time unusual in the history of Earth?
A.There are glaciers.
B.More land is covered by glaciers than at anytime in
the past.
C.There is no ice age.
D.No glaciers are found in Australia.
Throughout most of Earth 's history, glaciers did not
exist, but at the present time about 10 percent of
Earth's land surface is covered by glaciers.
Present-day glaciers are found in Antarctica, in
Greenland, and at high elevations on all the continents
except Australia. In the recent past, from about 2.4
million to about 10,000 years ago, nearly a third of
Earth's land area was periodically covered by ice
thousands of meters thick. In the much more distant
past, other ice ages have occurred.
Glaciers are slowly moving masses of ice that have accumulated on land in areas where more snowfalls during a
year than melts. Snow falls as hexagonal crystals, but once on the ground, snow is soon transformed into a
compacted mass of smaller, rounded grains. As the air space around them is lessened by compaction and
melting, the grains become denser. With further melting, refreezing, and increased weight from newer
snowfall above, the snow reaches a granular recrystallized stage intermediate between flakes and ice known asfirn. With additional time, pressure, and refrozen meltwater from above, the small firn granules become
larger, interlocked crystals of blue glacial ice. When the ice is thick enough, usually over 30 meters, the weight
of the snow and firn will cause the ice crystals toward the bottom to become plastic and to flow outward or
downward from the area of snow accumulation.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
Firn has the appearance of wet sugar, but it is almost as hard as ice.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Glaciers are part of Earth's hydrologic cycle.
A. Glaciers, which at present contain 80 percent of Earth's freshwater, form when accumulated snow is
compressed and recrystallized into ice over a period of years.
B. When there are glaciers on Earth, water is cycled through the glacier system, but the cycle period may be
hundreds of thousands of years during periods of ice ages.
C. The glacial system is governed by precipitation and temperature in such a way that glaciers cannot form in
temperate latitudes.
D. When glacial ice reaches a depth of 30 meters, the weight of the ice causes ice crystals at the bottom to flow,
and the resulting movement of the glacier carves the landscape.
E. If global warming melted the world's glaciers, sea level would rise about 60 meters worldwide.
F. Glaciers have had little effect on Earth's surface because only 2 percent of Earth's water is currently contained in
glaciers, and there are fewer glaciers now than at most times in the past.
TPO16
TPO16-1 Trade and the Ancient Middle East
1.According to paragraph 1, why has trade been so
important throughout the history of the Middle East
A.The rare and valuable metals and stones found in
Middle Eastern deserts have always been in high
demand in surrounding areas.
B.Growing conditions throughout the Middle East are
generally poor, forcing Middle Eastern people to
depend on imported grain.
C.Many useful and decorative raw materials cannot be
found naturally in the Middle East but are available
from neighboring regions.
D.Frequent travel, due to limited water supplies in the
Middle East, created many opportunities for trade
with neighboring societies.
Trade was the mainstay of the urban economy in the
Middle East, as caravans negotiated the surrounding
desert, restricted only by access to water and by
mountain ranges. This has been so since ancient times,
partly due to the geology of the area, which is mostly
limestone and sandstone, with few deposits of
metallic ore and other useful materials Ancient
demands for obsidian (a black volcanic rock useful for
making mirrors and tools) led to trade with Armenia to
the north, while jade for cutting tools was brought
from Turkistan, and the precious stone lapis lazuli was
imported from Afghanistan. One can trace such
expeditions back to ancient Sumeria, the earliest
known Middle Eastern civilization. Records show
merchant caravans and trading posts set up by the
Sumerians in the surrounding mountains and deserts
of Persia and Arabia, where they traded grain for raw
materials, such as timber and stones, as well as for
metals and gems.
2.The word “repudiate” in the passage is closest in
meaning to A.respect
B.reject
C.review
D.revise
3.According to paragraph 2, how did Middle Eastern
shop owners treat their workers? A.Workers were
ranked according to their skill level, with the
most-experienced artisans becoming partial owners of
the shop.
B.Shop owners treated different workers differently
depending on how much the workers had in common
with their masters.
C.Workers were bound to their masters by
unbreakable contracts that strictly defined the terms
of their partnership.
D.The shop owner worked alongside the workers and
often considered them partner and members of the
family.
Reliance on trade had several important
consequences. Production was generally in the hands
of skilled individual artisans doing piecework under
the tutelage of a master who was also the shop owner.
In these shops differences of rank were blurred as
artisans and masters labored side by side in the same
modest establishment, were usually members of the
same guild and religious sect, lived in the same
neighborhoods, and often had assumed (or real)
kinship relationships. The worker was bound to the
master by a mutual contract that either one couldrepudiate, and the relationship was conceptualized as
one of partnership.
4.The author includes the information that surplus
was not a result of domestic craft production but
resulted primarily from international trading in order
to
A.support the claim that the mode of production
made possible by the craft guilds w very good for
trade
B.contrast the economic base of the city government
with that of the tribal confederacies
C.provide a reason why the government allowed the
guilds to be self-controlled
D.suggest that the government was missing out on a
valuable opportunity to tax the guilds
This mode of craft production favored the growth of
self-governing and ideologically egalitarian craft guilds
everywhere in the Middle Eastern city. These were
essentially professional associations that provided for
the mutual aid and protection of their members, and
allowed for the maintenance of professional standards.
The growth of independent guilds was furthered bythe fact that surplus was not a result of domestic
craft production but resulted primarily from
international trading ; the government left working
people to govern themselves, much as shepherds of
tribal confederacies were left alone by their leaders. In
the multiplicity of small-scale local egalitarian or
quasi-egalitarian organizations for fellowship, worship,
and production that flourished in this laissez-faire
environment, individuals could interact with one
another within a community of harmony and
ideological equality, following their own popularly
elected leaders and governing themselves by sharedconsensus while minimizing distinctions of wealth and
power.
5.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence the
passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Tribes people were comfortable forming personal
relationships with merchants, who, like them, were
bound by their promises to one another.
B.Because
trade was not formally regulated, merchants were
careful about whom they trusted and often conducted
business with people they knew personally.
C.While
trade among merchants relied somewhat on
regulation, among tribes people trade was based on
personal relationships and careful character
evaluation.
D.Because tribes people were bound only
by their promises to one another, personal
relationships were formed only after careful weighing
of character.
6.According to paragraph 4, what choice did Middle
Eastern merchants and artisans have that many other
people have not had?
A.If they were unhappy in the mercantile environment,
they could draw on personal connections to find a
different kind of work.
B.They were allowed to assert their opinions without
having to listen to aristocratic professions of moral
superiority.
C.Following the example of the pastoralists, they could
demand, and receive, better working conditions.
D.If they didn't like their environment, they could
move somewhere else.
The mercantile economy was also characterized by a
peculiar moral stance that is typical of people who live
by trade—an attitude that is individualistic, calculating,
risk taking, and adaptive to circumstances. As among
tribespeople, personal relationships and a careful
weighing of character have always been crucial in a
mercantile economy with little regulation, where one's
word is one's bond and where informal ties of trust
cement together an international trade network. Nor
have merchants and artisans ever had much tolerance
for aristocratic professions of moral superiority,
favoring instead an egalitarian ethic of the open
market, where steady hard work, the loyalty of one's
fellows, and ntrepreneurial skill make all the
difference. And, like the pastoralists, Middle Eastern
merchants and artisans unhappy with their
environment could simply pack up and leave for
greener pastures —an act of self-assertion wholly
impossible in most other civilizations throughout
history.
7.The word “ intrinsically” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.fundamentally
B.surprisingly
C.consequently
D.particularly
8.In paragraph 5, why does the author mention the
new trade route opened up by Vasco da Gama's
fifteenth century voyage around Africa? A.To provide
evidence that European seafarers took every
opportunity to bypass Middle Eastern merchants
B.To present an instance in which Middle Eastern
states lost money and power because of their reliance
on long-distance trade
C.To argue this new route became necessary when
European seafarers wanted to avoid Middle Eastern
states whose central power had begun to erode
D.To explain how da Gama helped European traders
avoid the dangerous predators prowling the areas
surrounding Middle Eastern cities
Dependence on long-distance trade also meant
that the great empires of the Middle East were built
both literally and figuratively on shifting sand. The
central state, though often very rich and verypopulous, was intrinsically fragile, since the
development of new international trade routes could
undermine the monetary base and erode state power,
as occurred when European seafarers circumvented
Middle Eastern merchants after Vasco da Gama's
voyage around Africa in the late fifteenth century
opened up a southern route. The ecology of the
region also permitted armed predators to prowl the
surrounding barrens, which were almost impossible
for a state to control. Peripheral peoples therefore had
a great advantage in their dealings with the center,
making government authority insecure and anxious.
Reliance on trade had several important consequences. ▆Production was generally in the hands of skilled
individual artisans doing piecework under the tutelage of a master who was also the shop owner. ▆In these shops
differences of rank were blurred as artisans and masters labored side by side in the same modest establishment,
were usually members of the same guild and religious sect, lived in the same neighborhoods, and often had
assumed (or real) kinship relationships. ▆The worker was bound to the master by a mutual contract that either
one could repudiate, and the relationship was conceptualized as one of partnership. ▆
9.Look at the four squares [ ▆] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
12.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
220summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Since ancient times. reliance on trade has shaped the
culture and organizational structure of Middle Eastern societies.
Answer Choices
A. Persian and Arabian merchants traveled great distances to sell their finished goods at the marketplaces of
ancient Sumeria.
B. Revenue from trade was unevenly distributed, causing Middle Eastern societies to be characterized by
growing distinctions in wealth and power.
C. Qualities that were valued in the mercantile economy included individualism, hard work, loyalty, and the
willingness to take risks.
D. As production increased, centralized control over production also increased, leading in turn to
more-centralized control over fellowship and worship.
E. Crafts were produced by skilled artisans working in close, egalitarian relationships with their masters and
other fellow guild members.
F. The stability of Middle Eastern governments was threatened by their lack of control over international trade
patterns and over their own peripheral territories
TPO16-2 Development of the Periodic Table
1.The phrase interplay in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.sequence
B.interpretation
C.requirement
D.interaction
2.According to paragraph 1, what pattern did scientists
notice when the known elements were written in
order of increasing atomic mass?
A.The elements of the group of alkali metals were the
first elements in the order of increasing atomic mass.
B.Repetition of the same atomic masses for elements
in different groups appeared.
C.Elements with similar chemical properties appeared
in the listing at regular intervals.
D.Elements were chemically most similar to those just
before and after them in the order.
The periodic table is a chart that reflects the periodic
recurrence of chemical and physical properties of the
elements when the elements are arranged in order of
increasing atomic number (the number of protons in
the nucleus). It is a monumental scientific
achievement, and its development illustrates theessential interplay between observation, prediction,
and testing required for scientific progress. In the
1800's scientists were searching for new elements. By
the late 1860's more than 60 chemical elements had
been identified, and much was known about their
descriptive chemistry. Various proposals were put
forth to arrange the elements into groups based on
similarities in chemical and physical properties. The
next step was to recognize a connection between
group properties (physical or chemical similarities) and
atomic mass (the measured mass of an individual
atom of an element). When the elements known at
the time were ordered by increasing atomic mass, it
was found that successive elements belonged to
different chemical groups and that the order of the
groups in this sequence was fixed and repeated itself
at regular intervals. Thus when the series of elements
was written so as to begin a new horizontal row with
each alkali metal, elements of the same groups were
automatically assembled in vertical columns in a
periodic table of the elements. This table was the
forerunner of the modern table.
3.In paragraph 2, what is the author's purpose in
presenting the information about the decision by
Meyer and Mendeleyev to leave gaps in the periodic
table?
A.To illustrate their confidence that the organizing
principles of the periodic table would govern the
occurrence of all chemical elements
B.To indicate that some of their analyses of periodic
physical and chemical properties were later found to
be wrong
C.To support the idea that they were unwilling to place
new elements in the periodic table
D.To indicate how they handled their disagreement
about where to place new elements
4.What reason does the author provide for the claimthat
Mendeleyev was bolder than Meyer?
A.Mendeleyev corrected incorrect information Meyer
had proposed.
B.Mendeleyev assumed that some information
believed to be true about the elements was incorrect.
C.Mendeleyev argued that Meyer had not left enough
gaps in the periodic table.
D.Mendeleyev realized that elements were not
ordered by atomic mass in the periodic table.
5.According to paragraph 2, why did Mendeleyev
suggest changing the atomic mass of indium?
A.Because indium did not fit into the periodic table in
the place predicted by its atomic mass.
B.Because there was experimental evidence that the
atomic mass that had been assigned to indium was
incorrect.
C.Because there was an empty space between
cadmium and tin in the periodic table.
D.Because the chemical properties of indium were
similar to those of arsenic and selenium.
When the German chemist Lothar Meyer and
(independently) the Russian Dmitry Mendeleyev first
introduced the periodic table in 1869-70, one-third of
the naturally occurring chemical elements had not yet
been discovered. Yet both chemists were sufficiently
farsighted to leave gaps where their analyses of
periodic physical and chemical properties indicatedthat new elements should be located. Mendeleyev
was bolder than Meyer and even assumed that if a
measured atomic mass put an element in the wrong
place in the table, the atomic mass was wrong. In
some cases this was true. Indium, for example, had
previously been assigned an atomic mass between
those of arsenic and selenium. Because there is no
space in the periodic table between these two
elements, Mendeleyev suggested that the atomic
mass of indium be changed to a completely different
value, where it would fill an empty space between
cadmium and tin. In fact, subsequent work has shown
that in a periodic table, elements should not be
ordered strictly by atomic mass. For example,
tellurium comes before iodine in the periodic table,
even though its atomic mass is slightly greater. Such
anomalies are due to the relative abundance of the
"isotopes" or varieties of each element. All the
isotopes of a given element have the same number of
protons, but differ in their number of neutrons, and
hence in their atomic mass. The isotopes of a given
element have the same chemical properties but
slightly different physical properties. We now know
that atomic number (the number of protons in the
nucleus), not atomic mass number (the number of
protons and neutrons), determines chemical behavior.
6.It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that tellurium
comes before iodine in the periodic table even though
tellurium's atomic mass is slightly greater because
A.iodine is less common than tellurium
B.both iodine and tellurium have no isotopes
C.the chemical behavior of tellurium is highly variable
D.the atomic number of tellurium is smaller than that
of iodine
When the German chemist Lothar Meyer and
(independently) the Russian Dmitry Mendeleyev first
introduced the periodic table in 1869-70, one-third of
the naturally occurring chemical elements had not yet
been discovered. Yet both chemists were sufficiently
farsighted to leave gaps where their analyses of
periodic physical and chemical properties indicated
that new elements should be located. Mendeleyev
was bolder than Meyer and even assumed that if a
measured atomic mass put an element in the wrong
place in the table, the atomic mass was wrong. In
some cases this was true. Indium, for example, had
previously been assigned an atomic mass between
those of arsenic and selenium. Because there is no
space in the periodic table between these two
elements, Mendeleyev suggested that the atomic
mass of indium be changed to a completely different
value, where it would fill an empty space between
cadmium and tin. In fact, subsequent work has shown
that in a periodic table, elements should not be
ordered strictly by atomic mass. For example,
tellurium comes before iodine in the periodic table,
even though its atomic mass is slightly greater. Such
anomalies are due to the relative abundance of the
"isotopes" or varieties of each element. All the
isotopes of a given element have the same number of
protons, but differ in their number of neutrons, and
hence in their atomic mass. The isotopes of a given
element have the same chemical properties but
slightly different physical properties. We now know
that atomic number (the number of protons in the
nucleus), not atomic mass number (the number of
protons and neutrons), determines chemical behavior.
7.It can be inferred from paragraph 3 that the
significance of the discovery of gallium was that it
supported which of the following?
A.The idea that aluminum was correctly placed in the
periodic table.
B.Mendeleyev's prediction that eka-silicon would be
discovered next.
C.The organizing principle of the periodic table.
D.The idea that unknown elements existed
Mendeleyev went further than Meyer in another
respect: he predicted the properties of six elements
yet to be discovered. For example, a gap just below
aluminum suggested a new element would be foundwith properties analogous to those of aluminum.
Mendeleyev designated this element "eka-aluminum"
(eka is the Sanskrit word for "next") and predicted its
properties. Just five years later an element with the
proper atomic mass was isolated and named gallium
by its discoverer. The close correspondence between
the observed properties of gallium and Mendeleyev's
predictions for eka-aluminum lent strong support to
the periodic law. Additional support came in 1885
when eka-silicon, which had also been described in
advance by Mendeleyev, was discovered and named
germanium.
11.The word “ postulated” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.hypothesized
B.discovered
C.reported
D.generated
The structure of the periodic table appeared to limit
the number of possible elements. It was therefore
quite surprising when John William Strut ，Lord
Rayleigh, discovered a gaseous element in 1894 that
did not fit into the previous classification scheme. A
century earlier, Henry Cavendish had noted the
existence of a residual gas when oxygen and nitrogen
are removed from air, but its importance had not been
realized. Together with William Ramsay, Rayleigh
isolated the gas (separating it from other substances
into its pure state) and named it argon. Ramsay then
studied a gas that was present in natural gas deposits
and discovered that it was helium, an element whose
presence in the Sun had been noted earlier in the
spectrum of sunlight but that had not previously been
known on Earth. Rayleigh and Ramsay postulated the
existence of a new group of elements, and in 1898
other members of the series (neon, krypton, and
xenon) were isolated.
226The periodic table is a chart that reflects the periodic recurrence of chemical and physical properties of the
elements when the elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic number (the number of protons in the
nucleus). It is a monumental scientific achievement, and its development illustrates the essential interplay
between observation, prediction, and testing required for scientific progress. In the 1800's scientists were
searching for new elements. By the late 1860's more than 60 chemical elements had been identified, and much
was known about their descriptive chemistry. Various proposals were put forth to arrange the elements into
groups based on similarities in chemical and physical properties. ▆The next step was to recognize a connection
between group properties (physical or chemical similarities) and atomic mass (the measured mass of an individual
atom of an element). ▆When the elements known at the time were ordered by increasing atomic mass, it was
found that successive elements belonged to different chemical groups and that the order of the groups in this
sequence was fixed and repeated itself at regular intervals. ▆Thus when the series of elements was written so as
to begin a new horizontal row with each alkali metal, elements of the same groups were automatically assembled
in vertical columns in a periodic table of the elements. ▆This table was the forerunner of the modern table.
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
It was a natural Idea to break up the series of elements at the points where the sequence of chemical groups to
which the elements belonged began to repeat itself.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The periodic table introduced by Meyer and
Mendeleyev was the forerunner of the modern table of elements.
A. Lord Rayleigh provided evidence that the structure of the periodic table limited the potential number of
elements.
B. Mendeleyev and Meyer organized the known elements into a chart that revealed periodic recurrences of
chemical and physical properties.
C. Mendeleyev's successful prediction of the properties of then unknown elements lent support to the
acceptance of the periodic law.
D. Ramsay and Lord Rayleigh challenged the importance of the chemical research that Henry Cavendish had
done a century earlier.
E. Isotopes of a given element have exactly the same physical properties, but their chemical properties are
slightly different.
F. In the 1890's, Ramsay and Lord Rayleigh isolated argon and proposed the existence of a new series of
elements.
TPO16-3 Planets in Our Solar System
1. According to the passage, each of the following
statements comparing terrestrial planets with Jovian
planets is true EXCEPT:
A.Terrestrial planets are closer to the Sun than Jovian
planets.
B.Terrestrial planets have smaller diameters than
Jovian planets.
C.Terrestrial planets have smaller masses than Jovian
planets.
D.Terrestrial planets travel in a different direction than
Jovian planets do.
The Sun is the hub of a huge rotating system
consisting of nine planets, their satellites, and
numerous small bodies, including asteroids, comets,
and meteoroids. An estimated 99.85 percent of the
mass of our solar system is contained within the Sun,
while the planets collectively make up most of the
remaining 0.15 percent. The planets, in order of their
distance from the Sun, are Mercury, Venus, Earth,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto.
Under the control of the Sun's gravitational force,
each planet maintains an elliptical orbit and all of
them travel in the same direction.
The planets in our solar system fall into two groups:
the terrestrial (Earth-like) planets (Mercury, Venus,
Earth, and Mars) and the Jovian (Jupiter-like) planets
(Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune). Pluto is not
included in either category, because its great distance
from Earth and its small size make this planet's true
nature a mystery.
The most obvious difference between the terrestrial
and the Jovian planets is their size. The largest
terrestrial planet, Earth has a diameter only one
quarter as great as the diameter of the smallest Jovian
planet, Neptune, and its mass is only one seventeenth
as great. Hence, the Jovian planets are often called
giants. Also, because of their relative locations, the
four Jovian planets are known as the outer planets,
while the terrestrial planets are known as the inner
planets. There appears to be a correlation between
the positions of these planets and their sizes.
2.Paragraph 4 mentions which of the following as a
reason why terrestrial planets are dense?
A.They are made up of three groups of substances.
B.They are composed mainly of rocky and metallic
materials.
C.They contain more ice than Jovian planets.
D.They contain relatively small amounts of water.
3.Paragraph 4 supports each of the following
statements about Saturn EXCEPT: A.It is less dense
than any of the terrestrial planets.
B.It contains no rocky material.
C.It contains ices.
D.It contains a large percentage of gases.
Other dimensions along which the two groups differ
markedly are density and composition. The densities
of the terrestrial planets average about 5 times the
density of water, whereas the Jovian planets have
densities that average only 1.5 times the density of
water. One of the outer planets, Saturn, has a density
of only 0.7 that of water, which means that Saturn
would float in water. Variations in the composition of
the planets are largely responsible for the density
differences. The substances that make up both groups
of planets are divided into three groups—gases, rocks,
and ices—based on their melting points. The
terrestrial planets are mostly rocks: dense rocky and
metallic material, with minor amounts of gases. The
Jovian planets, on the other hand, contain a large
percentage of the gases hydrogen and helium, with
varying amounts of ices: mostly water, ammonia, and
methane ices.
4.According to paragraph 5, which of the following
statements is true of both Jovian and terrestrial
planets?
A.The thicker the atmosphere, the smaller the planet's
mass.
B.The more varied the gases in the atmosphere, the
higher the temperature
C.The higher the surface gravity, the higher the escape
velocity
D.The less the atmosphere contributes to the total
mass, the lower the temperature
5.According to paragraph 5, what is a major reason
that Jovian planets have much thicker atmospheres
than terrestrial planets do?
A.Jovian planets have lower surface gravities
B.Jovian planets have lower temperatures
C.Jovian planets have lower escape velocities
D.Jovian planets' gas molecules have higher average
speeds
6.Paragraph 5 supports which of the following
statements about the ability of planets to retain
gases?
A.More-massive planets are less able to retain gases
than less-massive ones.
B.Planets are more likely to retain heavy gases than
light gases.
C.Jovian planets are unlikely to retain the lightest
gases.
D.Only terrestrial planets have been able to retain
carbon dioxide.
The Jovian planets have very thick atmospheres
consisting of varying amounts of hydrogen, helium,
methane, and ammonia. By comparison, the
terrestrial planets have meager atmospheres at best.
A.planet's ability to retain an atmosphere depends on
its temperature and mass. Simply stated, a gas
molecule can "evaporate" from a planet if it reaches a
speed known as the escape velocity. For Earth, this
velocity is 11 kilometers per second. Any material,
including a rocket, must reach this speed before it can
leave Earth and go into space. The Jovian planets,
because of their greater masses and thus higher
surface gravities, have higher escape velocities (21-60
kilometers per second) than the terrestrial planets.
Consequently, it is more difficult for gases to
"evaporate" from them. Also, because the molecular
motion of a gas depends on temperature, at the low
temperatures of the Jovian planets even the lightest
gases are unlikely to acquire the speed needed to
escape. On the other hand, a comparatively warm
body with a small surface gravity, like Earth's moon, is
unable to hold even the heaviest gas and thus lacks an
atmosphere. The slightly larger terrestrial planets
Earth, Venus, and Mars retain some heavy gases like
carbon dioxide, but even their atmospheres make up
only an infinitesimally small portion of their total
mass.
7.In calling the cloud of gas and dust from which the
Sun and all the planets are thought to have condensed
"primordial, ' the author means that the cloud was.
A.immense in size
B.composed of similar particles
C.present at the very beginning of our solar system's
formation
D.created from a great variety of different materials8.The word eventually in the passage is closest in
meaning to A.over time
B.long ago
C.simply
D.certainly
The orderly nature of our solar system leads most
astronomers to conclude that the planets formed at
essentially the same time and from the same material
as the Sun. It is hypothesized thattheprimordial cloud of dust and gas from which all
the planets are thought to have condensed had a
composition somewhat similar to that of Jupiter.
However, unlike Jupiter, the terrestrial planets today
are nearly void of light gases and ices. The explanation
may be that the terrestrial planets were once muchlarger and richer in these materials but eventually lost
them because of these bodies' relative closeness to
the Sun, which meant that their temperatures were
relatively high.
Other dimensions along which the two groups differ markedly are density and composition. The densities of the
terrestrial planets average about 5 times the density of water, whereas the Jovian planets have densities that
average only 1.5 times the density of water. One of the outer planets, Saturn, has a density of only 0.7 that of
water, which means that Saturn would float in water. Variations in the composition of the planets are largely
responsible for the density differences. ▆The substances that make up both groups of planets are divided into
three groups—gases, rocks, and ices—based on their melting points. ▆The terrestrial planets are mostly rocks:
dense rocky and metallic material, with minor amounts of gases. ▆The Jovian planets, on the other hand, contain
a large percentage of the gases hydrogen and helium, with varying amounts of ices: mostly water, ammonia, and
methane ices. ▆
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: From the seven answer choices below, select the two phrases that correctly characterize the
terrestrial planets and the three phrases that correctly characterize the Jovian planets. Drag each phrase you
select into the appropriate column of the table. Two of the phrases will NOT be used. This question is worth 3
points.
A. Have relatively small sizes
B. Are grouped in the same category as Pluto
C. Contain relatively high proportions of ices
D. Have relatively high temperatures
E. Have densities that are generally lower than the density of water
F. Have relatively high escape velocities
G. Have a composition closer to that of the cloud from which they condensed
TPO17
TPO17-1 Europe's Early Sea Trade with Asia
1.The word impetus in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Return
B.Opportunity
C.Stimulus
D.Obstacle
2.According to paragraph 1 why was it necessary to
find a new way for European merchants to reach the
East?
A.People in China were finally ready to trade with
Europeans
B.The European economy was failing because there
was no trade with the East
C.Traditional ways of trading with the East had
becomevery costly
D.Commercial routes over land had become blocked
because of political events
In the fourteenth century, a number of political
developments cut Europe's overland trade routes to
southern and eastern Asia, with which Europe had had
important and highly profitable commercial ties since
the twelfth century. This development, coming as it
did when the bottom had fallen out of the Europeaneconomy, provided an impetus to a long-held desire
to secure direct relations with the East by establishing
a sea trade. Widely reported, if somewhat distrusted,
accounts by figures like the famous traveler from
Venice, Marco Polo, of the willingness of people in
China to trade with Europeans and of the immensity
of the wealth to be gained by such contact made the
idea irresistible. Possibilities for trade seemed
promising, but no hope existed for maintaining the
traditional routes over land A new way had to be
found.
3.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The high cost to investors of developing trade by sea
between East and West indicates the great size of the
profits that such trade could produce.
B.The profits that could be created by sea trade
between East and West were immense compared with
the investment required to develop such trade.
C.The increase in commercial activity by using sea
routes reflects the importance trade between East and
West had for investors seeking great profits.
D.Because people made large investments in sea
commerce between East and West. They expected to
make immense profits.
4.It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that spices from
Asia were desirable in Europe in the Middle Ages
because they
A.were easily transported in large quantities
B.could not be produced in European countries
C.could be traded for products such as perfumes and
medicines
D.were expected to increase in value over time
The chief problem was technological: How were the
Europeans to reach the East? Europe's maritime
tradition had developed in the context of easily
navigable seas—the Mediterranean, the Baltic, and, to
a lesser extent, the North Sea between England and
the Continent—not of vast oceans. New types of ships
were needed, new methods of finding one's way, newtechniques for financing so vast a scheme. The sheer
scale of the investment it took to begin commercial
expansion at sea reflects the immensity of the profits
that such East-West trade could create. Spices were
the most sought-after commodities. Spices not only
dramatically improved the taste of the European diet
but also were used to manufacture perfumes and
certain medicines. But even high-priced commodities
like spices had to be transported in large bulk in order
to justify the expense and trouble of sailing around
the African continent all the way to India and China.
5.According to paragraph 3, what did the lateen sail
contribute to the caravel as a sailing ship?
A.It provided stability for the front part of the ship.
B.It made it possible for the hull to be wider and
deeper.
C.It added considerably to the speed of the
wind-driven ship.
D.It improved the capacity of the ship to be guided.
The principal seagoing ship used throughout the
Middle Ages was the galley, a long, low ship fitted with
sails but driven primarily by oars. The largest galleys
had as many as 50 oarsmen Since they had relatively
shallow hulls, they were unstable when driven by sail
or when on rough water: hence they were unsuitable
for the voyage to the East. Even if they hugged the
African coastline, they had little chance of surviving a
crossing of the Indian Ocean. Shortly after 1400,
shipbuilders began developing a new type of vessel
properly designed to operate in rough, open water:
the caravel. It had a wider and deeper hull than the
galley and hence could carry more cargo: increased
stability made it possible to add multiple masts and
sails. In the largest caravels, two main masts held large
square sails that provided the bulk of the thrust
driving the ship forward, while a smaller forward mast
held a triangular-shaped sail, called a lateen sail,
which could be moved into a variety of positions to
maneuver the ship.
6.Why does the author include the information that
Western Europeans had d eveloped and put into use
the magnetic compass
A.To provide an example of an instrument that was
developed after caravels had begun traveling across
oceans
B.To provide an example of an improvement that
resulted directly from the invention of the astrolabe
C.To identify one of the technological advances that
made sea trade with the East possible
D.To explain how the problem of determining
longitude was solved7.The word refined in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Completed
B.Improved
C.Drawn
D.Checked
8.According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
true of the maritime code developed in Europe in the
fourteenth century?
A.It mapped out lanes in the seas for trading ships to
follow.
B.It defined the ways in which people should behave
at sea.
C.It replaced an earlier code that could not be adapted
to the sea trade with the East.
D.It gave instructions on how to navigate a ship.
The astrolabe had long been the primary instrument
for navigation, having been introduced in the eleventh
century. It operated by measuring the height of the
Sun and the fixed stars: by calculating the angles
created by these points, it determined the degree of
latitude at which one stood (The problem of
determining longitude, though, was not solved until
the eighteenth century.) By the early thirteenthcentury. Western Europeans had also developed and
put into use the magnetic compass , which helped
when clouds obliterated both the Sun and the stars.
Also beginning in the thirteenth century, there werenew maps refined by precise calculations and the
reports of sailors that made it possible to trace one's
path with reasonable accuracy. Certain institutionaland practical norms had become established as well. A
maritime code known as the Consulate of the Sea,
which originated in the western Mediterranean region
in the fourteenth century, won acceptance by a
majority of sea goers as the normative code for
maritime conduct; it defined such matters as the
authority of a ship's officers, protocols of command,
pay structures, the rights of sailors, and the rules of
engagement when ships met one another on the
sea-lanes. Thus by about 1400 the key elements were
in place to enable Europe to begin its seaward
adventure.
236The chief problem was technological: How were the Europeans to reach the East? Europe's maritime tradition had
developed in the context of easily navigable seas —the Mediterranean, the Baltic, and, to a lesser extent, the
North Sea between England and the Continent —not of vast oceans. New types of ships were needed, new
methods of finding one's way, new techniques for financing so vast a scheme. The sheer scale of the investment it
took to begin commercial expansion at sea reflects the immensity of the profits that such East-West trade could
create. ▆Spices were the most sought-after commodities. ▆Spices not only dramatically improved the taste of
the European diet but also were used to manufacture perfumes and certain medicines. ▆But even high-priced
commodities like spices had to be transported in large bulk in order to justify the expense and trouble of sailing
around the African continent all the way to India and China. ▆
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Symbiotic relationships involve the interaction of two
or more organisms acting as partners.
A. Parasitic relationships involve the interplay of aggression by the parasite and resistance and adaptation by the
host.
B. Mutualism ordinarily involves an interaction between two members of the same species.
C. Mutualism is unique among symbiotic relationships in that it r benefits both partners involved in the
relationship.
D. Parasitic damage to Australian rabbits was never reversed because the rabbits were unable to adapt to the
parasites' attacks.
E. The rarity of commensal relationships stems from the difficulty of finding relationships that benefit one
species without affecting the other.
F. The structure of biological communities depends on the types of relationships that exist among the species
within.
TPO17-2 Animal Signals in the Rain Forest
1.According to paragraph 2, what is problematic about
an animal's sending visual signals to members of its
own species?
A. Signs that make an animal visible to its species also
make it visible to predators.
B. An animal that changes color to avoid predators can
confuse members of its species.
C. Changing light may require an animal to move
beyond the visual range of other members.
D. The animal may mistakenly signal aggression when
it meant to signal readiness to mate.
2.The word signal in the passage is closest in meaning
to
A.change
B.imitate
C.communicate
D.hide
The daytime quality of light in forests varies with the
density of the vegetation, the angle of the Sun, and
the amount of cloud in the sky. Both animals and
plants have different appearances in these various
lighting conditions. A color or pattern that is relatively
indistinct in one kind of light may be quite
conspicuous in another.
In the varied and constantly changing light
environment of the forest, an animal must be able to
send visual signals to members of its own species and
at the same time avoid being detected by predators.
An animal can hide from predators by choosing the
light environment in which its pattern is least visible.
This may require moving to different parts of the
forest at different times of the day or under different
weather conditions, or it may be achieved by changing
color according to the changing light conditions. Many
species of amphibians (frogs and toads) and reptiles
(lizards and snakes) are able to change their color
patterns to camouflage themselves. Some also signal
by changing color. The chameleon lizard has the most
striking ability to do this. Some chameleon species can
change from a rather dull appearance to a full riot of
carnival colors in seconds. By this means, they signal
their level of aggression or readiness to mate.
3.According to paragraph 3, butterflies move into
spots of sunlight in order to
A.warm their wings in order to open them
B.compete with each other
C.take advantage of favorable light conditions on the
forest floor
D.imitate birds of paradise
4.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.When an animal is signaling in an area with green-to
yellow lighting condition. It's signal will not be visible
if the background is brightly lit.
B.In the lowest levels of the forest, an animal's signals
are not easily seen unless there is a yellowish or
greenish background.
C.In the green-to-yellow lighting conditions at the
lowest levels of the forest, only signals that are
themselves green or yellow will be bright enough to
be seen in most areas.
D.Although green and yellow would be the brightest
colors near the forest floor, these colors would make
poor signals whenever the forest background was also
in the green-to-yellow range.
5.The word inflating in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Coloring
B.Enlarging
C.Loosening
D.Heating
Other species take into account the changing
conditions of light by performing their visual displays
only when the light is favorable. A male bird of
paradise may put himself in the limelight by displaying
his spectacular plumage in the best stage setting to
attract a female. Certain butterflies move into spots of
sunlight that have penetrated to the forest floor and
display by opening and closing their beautifully
patterned wings in the bright spotlights. They also
compete with each other for the best spot of sunlight.
Very little light filters through the canopy of leaves and
branches in a rain forest to reach ground level—or
close to the ground—and at those levels the
yellow-to-green wavelengths predominate. A signalmight be most easily seen if it is maximally bright. In
the green-to-yellow lighting conditions of the lowest
levels of the forest, yellow and green would be the
brightest colors, but when an animal is signaling,
these colors would not be very visible if the animal
was sitting in an area with a yellowish or greenish
background. The best signal depends not only on its
brightness but also on how well it contrasts with the
background against which it must be seen. In this part
of the rain forest, therefore, red and orange are the
best colors for signaling, and they are the colors used
in signals by the ground-walking Australian brush
turkey. This species, which lives in the rain forests and
scrublands of the east coast of Australia, has a
brown-to-black plumage with bare, bright-red skin on
the head and neck and a neck collar of orange-yellow
loosely hanging skin. During courtship and aggressive
displays, the turkey enlarges its colored neck collar byinflating sacs in the neck region and then flings about
a pendulous part of the colored signaling apparatus as
it utters calls designed to attract or repel. This
impressive display is clearly visible in the light
spectrum illuminating the forest floor.
6.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 4 about yellow and green colors compared
with red and orange colors at the bottom of the
forest?
A.Yellow and green are better colors for signaling than
red and orange colors.
B.Orange and red are brighter colors than yellow and
green.
C.Yellow and green are likely to be more common in
the background than red and orange.
D.Orange and red colors do not contrast as well with
the forest floor as yellow and green do.
7.What can be inferred from paragraph 5 about the
less colorful birds and animals that inhabit the forest?
A.These species are less able to see color. and
therefore they communicate with one another using
nonvisual signals.
B.These species generally live in less densely wooded
environments than more colorful birds and animals
do.
C.The cries of these species do not carry as well over
distances as the cries of more colorful birds and
animals.
D.These species depend more on nonvisual signals for
communication because they are less visible in their
environment.
8.The word impediment in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.obstruction
B.effort
C.delay
D.resistance
Less colorful birds and animals that inhabit the rain
forest tend to rely on other forms of signaling other
than the visual, particularly over long distances. The
piercing cries of the rhinoceros hornbill characterize
the Southeast Asian rain forest, as do the
unmistakable calls of the gibbons. In densely wooded
environments, sound is the best means of
communication over distance because in comparisonwith light, it travels with little impediment from trees
and other vegetation. In forests, visual signals can be
seen only at short distances, where they are not
obstructed by trees. The male riflebird exploits12 both
of these modes of signaling simultaneously in his
courtship display. The sounds made as each wing is
opened carry extremely well over distance and
advertise his presence widely. The ritualized visual
display communicates in close quarters when a female
has approached.
240Less colorful birds and animals that inhabit the rain forest tend to rely on other forms of signaling other than the
visual, particularly over long distances. ▆The piercing cries of the rhinoceros hornbill characterize the Southeast
Asian rain forest, as do the unmistakable calls of the gibbons. ▆In densely wooded environments, sound is the
best means of communication over distance because in comparison with light, it travels with little impediment
from trees and other vegetation. ▆In forests, visual signals can be seen only at short distances, where they are
not obstructed by trees. ▆The male riflebird exploits12 both of these modes of signaling simultaneously in his
courtship display. The sounds made as each wing is opened carry extremely well over distance and advertise his
presence widely. The ritualized visual display communicates in close quarters when a female has approached.
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
There is also the long, rather terrifying call of the male orangutan, which carries over considerable distances to
advertise his presence.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. In the rain forest, an animal must be able to send
signals to members of its own species and at the same time avoid being detected by predators
Answer Choices
A. Animals that have different predators at different times of day change color to avoid being detected.
B. To be noticed, an animal may draw attention to the contrast between its colors and the colors of its
environment.
C. Yellow and green are the most common colors found in the rain forest.
D. To escape notice, an animal may move or change color so that its color pattern is not visible.
E. Animals must have signals for aggression as well as to indicate readiness to mate.
F. An animal may use sound rather than color to attract attention, because sound signals are not hindered by
light conditions.
TPO17-3 Symbiotic Relationships
1.Which of the following statements about
commensalism can be inferred from paragraph 1?A.It
excludes interactions between more than two species.
B.It makes it less likely for species within a community
to survive.
C.Its significance to the organization of biological
communities is small.
D.Its role in the structure of biological populations is a
disruptive one.
2.According to paragraph 2. which of the following is
true of the action of natural selection on hosts and
parasites?
A.Hosts benefit more from natural selection than
parasites do.
B.Both aggression in predators and defensive
capacities in hosts are favored for species survival.
C.The ability to make toxic chemicals enables a
parasite to find and isolate its host.
D.Larger size equips a parasite to prey on smaller host
organisms.
A symbiotic relationship is an interaction between two
or more species in which one species lives in or on
another species. There are three main types of
symbiotic relationships: parasitism, commensalism,
and mutualism. The first and the third can be key
factors in the structure of a biological community; that
is, all the populations of organisms living together and
potentially interacting in a particular area.
Parasitism is a kind of predator-prey relationship in
which one organism, the parasite, derives its food at
the expense of its symbiotic associate, the host.
Parasites are usually smaller than their hosts. An
example of a parasite is a tapeworm that lives inside
the intestines of a larger animal and absorbs nutrients
from its host. Natural selection favors the parasites
that are best able to find and feed on hosts. At the
same time, defensive abilities of hosts are also
selected for. As an example, plants make chemicals
toxic to fungal and bacterial parasites, along with ones
toxic to predatory animals (sometimes they are the
same chemicals). In vertebrates, the immune system
provides a multiple defense against internal parasites.
3.According to paragraph 3, all of the following
characterize the way natural selection stabilized the
Australian rabbit population EXCEPT:
A.The most toxic viruses died with their hosts.
B.The surviving rabbits were increasingly immune to
the virus.
C.The decline of the mosquito population caused the
spread of the virus to decline.
D.Rabbits with specific genetic make-ups were
favored.
4.The word inadvertently in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Indefensibly
B.Substantially
C.Unintentionally
D.Partially
At times, it is actually possible to watch the effects of
natural selection in host-parasite relationships. For
example, Australia during the 1940 s was overrun by
hundreds of millions of European rabbits. The rabbits
destroyed huge expanses of Australia and threatened
the sheep and cattle industries. In 1950, myxoma virus,
a parasite that affects rabbits, was deliberately
introduced into Australia to control the rabbit
population. Spread rapidly by mosquitoes, the
virus devastated the rabbit population. The virus was
less deadly to the offspring of surviving rabbits,
however, and it caused less and less harm over the
years. Apparently, genotypes (the genetic make-up of
an organism) in the rabbit population were selected
that were better able to resist the parasite. Meanwhile,
the deadliest strains of the virus perished with their
hosts as natural selection favored strains that could
infect hosts but not kill them. Thus, natural selection
stabilized this host-parasite relationship.
In contrast to parasitism, in commensalism, one
partner benefits without significantly affecting the
other. Few cases of absolute commensalism probably
exist, because it is unlikely that one of the partners
will be completely unaffected. Commensal
associations sometimes involve one species' obtainingfood that is inadvertently exposed by another. For
instance, several kinds of birds feed on insects flushed
out of the grass by grazing cattle. It is difficult to
imagine how this could affect the cattle, but the
relationship may help or hinder them in some way not
yet recognized.
5.According to paragraph 5, the relationship between
legumes and bacteria benefits the soil by
A.adding enriching carbohydrates
B.speeding the decay of organic matter
C.destroying enzymes that pollute it
D.contributing nitrogen to it
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The relationship between flowering plants and
pollinators provides pollinators with food and flowers
with efficient reproduction.
B.In some cases birds obtain food from the seeds that
are dispersed in the wind.
C.The wind not only helps the flowers distribute their
seeds but enables birds to find more food.
D.Animals and insects are more effective in
distributing pollen and seeds than the wind.
7.According to paragraph 5. which of the following is
NOT true of the relationship between the bull's horn
acacia tree and the Pseudomyrmex ants?
A.Ants defend the host trees against the predatory
actions of insects and animals.
B.The acacia trees are a valuable source of nutrition
for the ants.
C.The ants enable the acacia tree to produce its own
chemical defenses.
D.The ants protect the acacia from having to compete
with surrounding vegetation.
The third type of symbiosis, mutualism, benefits both
partners in the relationship Legume plants and their
nitrogen-fixing bacteria, and the interactions between
flowering plants and their pollinators, are examples ofmutualistic association. In the first case, the plants
provide the bacteria with carbohydrates and other
organic compounds, and the bacteria have enzymes
that act as catalysts that eventually add nitrogen to
the soil, enriching it. In the second case, pollinators
(insects, birds) obtain food from the flowering plant,
and the plant has its pollen distributed and seeds
dispersed much more efficiently than they would be
if they were carried by the wind only. Another
example of mutualism would be the bull's horn acacia
tree, which grows in Central and South America. The
tree provides a place to live for ants of the genus
Pseudomyrmex. The ants live in large, hollow thorns
and eat sugar secreted by the tree. The ants also eat
yellow structures at the tip of leaflets: these are
protein rich and seem to have no function for the tree
except to attract ants. The ants benefit the host tree
by attacking virtually anything that touches it. They
sting other insects and large herbivores (animals that
eat only plants) and even clip surrounding vegetation
that grows near the tree. When the ants are removed,
the trees usually die, probably because herbivores
damage them so much that they are unable to
compete with surrounding vegetation for light and
growing space.
8.The word highlights in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Defines
B.Emphasizes
C.Reflects
D.Suggests
The complex interplay of species in symbiotic
relationships highlights an important point about
communities: Their structure depends on a web of
diverse connections among organisms.
At times, it is actually possible to watch the effects of natural selection in host-parasite relationships. For example,
Australia during the 1940 s was overrun by hundreds of millions of European rabbits. ▆The rabbits destroyed
huge expanses of Australia and threatened the sheep and cattle industries. ▆In 1950, myxoma virus, a parasite
that affects rabbits, was deliberately introduced into Australia to control the rabbit population. ▆Spread rapidly
by mosquitoes, the virus devastated the rabbit population. ▆The virus was less deadly to the offspring of
surviving rabbits, however, and it caused less and less harm over the years. Apparently, genotypes (the genetic
make-up of an organism) in the rabbit population were selected that were better able to resist the parasite.
Meanwhile, the deadliest strains of the virus perished with their hosts as natural selection favored strains that
could infect hosts but not kill them. Thus, natural selection stabilized this host-parasite relationship.
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This massive population began a century earlier as a mere twelve pairs of imported rabbits that reproduced
quickly and developed into a major problem.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Symbiotic relationships involve the interaction of two
or more organisms acting as partners.
A. Parasitic relationships involve the interplay of aggression by the parasite and resistance and adaptation by the
host.
B. Mutualism ordinarily involves an interaction between two members of the same species.
C. Mutualism is unique among symbiotic relationships in that it r benefits both partners involved in the
relationship.
D. Parasitic damage to Australian rabbits was never reversed because the rabbits were unable to adapt to the
parasites' attacks.
E. The rarity of commensal relationships stems from the difficulty of finding relationships that benefit one
species without affecting the other.
F. The structure of biological communities depends on the types of relationships that exist among the species
within.
TPO18
TPO18-1 Industrialization in the Netherlands and Scandinavia
1.Paragraph 1 supports which of the following ideas
about England and Germany?
A.They were completely industrialized by the start of
the nineteenth century.
B.They possessed plentiful supplies of coal.
C.They were overtaken economically by the
Netherlands and Scandinavia during the early
nineteenth century.
D.They succeeded for the same reasons that the
Netherlands and Scandinavia did.
2.Paragraph 2 suggests which of the following about
the importance of population density in the
industrialization of the Netherlands and Scandinavia?
A.It was a more important factor than population size.
B.It was more influential than the rate of population
growth.
C.It was more important in the early stages than it was
later.
D.It was not a significant factor.
While some European countries, such as England and
Germany, began to industrialize in the eighteenth
century, the Netherlands and the Scandinavian
countries of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden
developed later. All four of these countries lagged
considerably behind in the early nineteenth century.
However, they industrialized rapidly in the second half
of the century, especially in the last two or three
decades. In view of their later start and their lack of
coal—undoubtedly the main reason they were not
among the early industrializers—it is important to
understand the sources of their success.
All had small populations. At the beginning of the
nineteenth century, Denmark and Norway had fewer
than 1 million people, while Sweden and the
Netherlands had fewer than 2.5 million inhabitants. All
exhibited moderate growth rates in the course of the
century (Denmark the highest and Sweden the lowest),
but all more than doubled in population by 1900.
Density varied greatly. The Netherlands had one of the
highest population densities in Europe, whereas
Norway and Sweden had the lowest Denmark was in
between but closer to the Netherlands.
Considering human capital as a characteristic of the
population, however, all four countries were
advantaged by the large percentages of their
populations who could read and write. In both 1850
and 1914, the Scandinavian countries had the highest
literacy rates in Europe, or in the world, and the
Netherlands was well above the European average.
This fact was of enormous value in helping the
national economies find their niches in the evolving
currents of the international economy.
3.The word “exceptional ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.extraordinary
B.surprising
C.immediate
D.predictable
4.According to paragraph 5, each of the following
contributed positively to the industrialization of the
Netherlands and Scandinavia EXCEPT
A.generally liberal trade policies
B.huge projects undertaken by the state
C.relatively uncorrupt governments
D.relatively little social or political disruption5.The author includes the information that “a
protectionist movement developed in Sweden ”in
order to
A. support the claim that the political institutions of
the four countries posed no significant barriers to
industrialization or economic growth
B. identify an exception to the general trend favoring
liberal trade policy
C. explain why Sweden industrialized less quickly than
the other Scandinavian countries and Netherlands
D. provide evidence that agricultural reforms take
place more quickly in countries that have a liberal
trade policy than in those that do not
Location was an important factor for all four countries.
All had immediate access to the sea, and this had
important implications for a significant international
resource, fish, as well as for cheap transport,
merchant marines, and the shipbuilding industry. Each
took advantage of these opportunities in its own way.
The people of the Netherlands, with a long tradition of
fisheries and mercantile shipping, had difficulty in
developing good harbors suitable for steamships:
eventually they did so at Rotterdam and Amsterdam,with exceptional results for transit trade with
Germany and central Europe and for the processing of
overseas foodstuffs and raw materials (sugar, tobacco,
chocolate, grain, and eventually oil). Denmark also
had an admirable commercial history, particularly with
respect to traffic through the Sound (the strait
separating Denmark and Sweden). In 1857, in return
for a payment of 63 million kronor from other
commercial nations, Denmark abolished the Sound
toll dues the fees it had collected since 1497 for the
use of the Sound. This, along with other policy shifts
toward free trade, resulted in a significant increase in
traffic through the Sound and in the port of
Copenhagen.
The political institutions of the four countries posed
no significant barriers to industrialization or economic
growth. The nineteenth century passed relatively
peacefully for these countries, with progressive
democratization taking place in all of them. They were
reasonably well governed, without notable corruption
or grandiose state projects, although in all of them the
government gave some aid to railways, and in Sweden
the state built the main lines. As small countries
dependent on foreign markets, they followed a liberaltrade policy in the main, though a protectionist
movement developed in Sweden . In Denmark and
Sweden agricultural reforms took place gradually from
the late eighteenth century through the first half of
the nineteenth, resulting in a new class of peasant
landowners with a definite market orientation.
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The early industrializes controlled most of the
international economy, leaving these countries to
stake out new areas of specialization along the
margins.
B.Aided by their high literacy rates these countries
were able to claim key areas of specialization within
established international markets.
C.High literacy rates enabled these countries to take
over international markets and adapt the international
division of labor to suit their strengths.
D.The international division of labor established by the
early industrializers was suited to these countries, a
key factor in their success.
7.According to paragraph 6, a major problem with
depending heavily on international markets was that
they
A.lacked stability
B.were not well suited to agricultural products
C.were largely controlled by the early industrializers
D.led to slower growth of local industries
12.According to paragraph 6, what advantage could a
country gain from being heavily involved in
international commerce?
A.A steadily rising national income
B.Greater control over market fluctuations
C.High returns when things went well
D.A reduced need for imports
The key factor in the success of these countries
(along with high literacy, which contributed to it) was
their ability to adapt to the international division of
labor determined by the early industrializers and to
stake out areas of specialization in international
markets for which they were especially well
suited. This meant a great dependence on
international commerce, which had notorious
fluctuations; but it also meant high returns to those
factors of production that were fortunate enough to
be well placed in times of prosperity. In Sweden
exports accounted for 18 percent of the national
income in 1870, and in 1913, 22 percent of a much
larger national income. In the early twentieth century,
Denmark exported 63 percent of its agricultural
production: butter, pork products, and eggs. It
exported 80 percent of its butter, almost all to Great
Britain, where it accounted for 40 percent of British
butter imports.
249While some European countries, such as England and Germany, began to industrialize in the eighteenth century,
the Netherlands and the Scandinavian countries of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden developed later. ▆All four of
these countries lagged considerably behind in the early nineteenth century. ▆However, they industrialized rapidly
in the second half of the century, especially in the last two or three decades. ▆In view of their later start and their
lack of coal—undoubtedly the main reason they were not among the early industrializers—it is important to
understand the sources of their success. ▆
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence be added to passage. Where would the
sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THERR answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Although the Netherlands and Scandinavia began to
industrialize relatively late, they did so very successfully.
A. Although these countries all started with small, uneducated populations, industrialization led to significant
population growth and higher literacy rates.
B. Because they all started with good harbors for steamships, these countries started with an important
advantage in the competition for transit trade.
C. These countries were successful primarily because their high literacy rates helped them fill specialized market
niches.
D. Thanks to their ready access to the sea, these countries enjoyed advantages in mercantile shipping, fishing,
and shipbuilding.
E. These countries were helped by the fact that their governments were relatively stable and honest and
generally supported liberal trade policies.
F. Because they were never fully dependent on international commerce, these countries were able to survive
notorious fluctuations in international markets.
TPO18-2 The mystery of yawning
1.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information .
A.It is the conventional theory that when people are
bored or sleepy, they often experience a drop in blood
oxygen levels due to their shallow breathing.
B.The conventional theory is that people yawn when
bored or sleepy because yawning raises blood oxygen
levels, which in turn raises alertness.
C.According to conventional theory, yawning is more
likely to occur when people are bored or sleepy than
when they are alert and breathing deeply.
D.Yawning, according to the conventional theory, is
caused by boredom or lack of sleep and can be
avoided through deeper breathing.
2.In paragragh1, what point does the author make
about the evidence for the tiredness theory of
yawning?
A.There is no scientific evidence linking yawning with
tiredness.
B.The evidence is wide-ranging because it covers
multiple age-groups.
C.The evidence is reliable because it was collected
over a long period of time.
D.The evidence is questionable because the yawning
patterns of children and adults should be different.
According to conventional theory, yawning takes
place when people are bored or sleepy and serves
the function of increasing alertness by reversing,
through deeper breathing, the drop in blood oxygen
levels that are caused by the shallow breathing that
accompanies lack of sleep or boredom. Unfortunately,
the few scientific investigations of yawning have failed
to find any connection between how often someone
yawns and how much sleep they have had or how
tired they are. About the closest any research has
come to supporting the tiredness theory is to confirm
that adults yawn more often on weekdays than at
weekends, and that school children yawn more
frequently in their first year at primary school than
they do in kindergarten.
3.In the paragraph 2, why does the author note that
there were physiological changes when subjects
opened their mouths or breathed deeply?
A. To present an argument in support of the tiredness
theory
B.To cast doubt on the reliability of the tests that
measured heart rate, muscle tension and skin
conductance
C.To argue against the hypothesis that yawning
provides a special way to improve alertness or raise
physiological activity
D.To support the idea that opening the mouth or
breathing deeply can affect blood oxygen levels
Another flaw of the tiredness theory is that yawning
does not raise alertness or physiological activity, as the
theory would predict. When researchers measured
the heart rate, muscle tension and skin conductance
of people before, during and after yawning, they did
detect some changes in skin conductance following
yawning, indicating a slight increase in physiological
activity. However, similar changes occurred when the
subjects were asked simply to open their mouths or to
breathe deeply. Yawning did nothing special to their
state of physiological activity. Experiments have also
cast serious doubt on the belief that yawning is
triggered by a drop in blood oxygen or a rise in blood
carbon dioxide. Volunteers were told to think about
yawning while they breathed either normal air, pure
oxygen, or an air mixture with an above-normal level
of carbon dioxide. If the theory was correct, breathingair with extra carbon dioxide should have triggered
yawning, while breathing pure oxygen should have
suppressed yawning. In fact, neither condition made
any difference to the frequency of yawning, which
remained constant at about 24 yawns per hour.
Another experiment demonstrated that physical
exercise, which was sufficiently vigorous to double the
rate of breathing, had no effect on the frequency of
yawning. Again the implication is that yawning has
little or nothing to do with oxygen.
4.According to the developmental theory of yawning
presented in paragraph 3, what is the role of yawning?
A.It caused hiccups, which aid in the development of
the lungs.
B.It controls the amount of pressure the lungs place
on other developing organs.
C.It prevents amniotic fluid from entering the lungs.
D.It removes a potentially harmful fluid from the
lungs.
5.Paragraph 3 supports which of the following
statements about the development theory of
yawning?
A.The theory is attractive because it explains yawning
from the perspective of Darwinian evolution.
B.The theory is unsatisfactory because it cannot
explain the lung deformities of infants.
C.The theory is questionable because it does not
explain why a useless and inconvenient behavior
would continue into adulthood.
D.The theory is incomplete because it does not explain
all the evolutionary stages in the development of
yawning.
A completely different theory holds that yawning
assists in the physical development of the lungs early
in life, but has no remaining biological function in
adults. It has been suggested that yawning and
hiccupping might serve to clear out the fetuses
airways. The lungs of a fetus secrete a liquid that
mixes with its mother's amniotic fluid. Babies with
congenital blockages that prevent this fluid from
escaping from their lungs are sometimes born with
deformed lungs. It might be that yawning helps to
clear out the lungs by periodically owering the
pressure in them. According to this theory, yawning in
adults is just a developmental fossil with no biological
function. But, while accepting that not everything in
life can be explained by Darwinian evolution, there are
sound reasons for being skeptical of theories like this
one, which avoid the issue of what yawning does for
adults. Yawning is distracting, consumes energy and
takes time. It is almost certainly doing something
significant in adults as well as in fetuses. What could it
be?
6.The word “ empirica l” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.reliable
B.based on common sense
C.relevant
D.based on observation
7.The study of yawning behavior discussed in
paragraph 4 supports which of the following
conclusions?
A.Yawning is associated with an expectation of
increased physical activity.
B.Yawning occurs more frequently when people are
asked to record their yawning.
C.People tend to yawn about fifteen minutes before
they become tired or bored.
D.Mental or physical stress tends to make people
yawn.
8.Why does the author mention “ soldiers yawning
before combat, musicians yawning before
performing, and athletes yawning before
competing ”?
A.To argue that just the expectation of physical activity
can make some people feel tired
B.To explain how the view that people yawn because
they are tired accounts for yawning before stressful
situations
C.To support the view that yawning helps prepare a
person for mental or physical exertion
D.To provide anecdotal evidence that conflicts with
the experience of the volunteers in the study
The empirical evidence, such as it is, suggests an
altogether different function for yawning—namely,
that yawning prepares us for a change in activity level.
Support for this theory came from a study of yawning
behavior in everyday life. Volunteers wore
wrist-mounted devices that automatically recorded
their physical activity for up to two weeks: the
volunteers also recorded their yawns by pressing a
button on the device each time they yawned. The data
showed that yawning tended to occur about 15
minutes before a period of increased behavioral
activity. Yawning bore no relationship to sleep
patterns, however. This accords with anecdotal
evidence that people often yawn in situations where
they are neither tired nor bored, but are preparing for
impending mental and physical activity. Such yawning
is often referred to as "incongruous" because it seemsout of place, at least on the tiredness view: soldiers
yawning before combat, musicians yawning before
performing, and athletes yawning before competing.
Their yawning seems to have nothing to do with
sleepiness or boredom—quite the reverse—but it
does precede a change in activity level.
254physiological activity, as the theory would predict. When researchers measured the heart rate, muscle tension and
skin conductance of people before, during and after yawning, they did detect some changes in skin conductance
following yawning, indicating a slight increase in physiological activity. However, similar changes occurred when
the subjects were asked simply to open their mouths or to breathe deeply. Yawning did nothing special to their
state of physiological activity. Experiments have also cast serious doubt on the belief that yawning is triggered by a
drop in blood oxygen or a rise in blood carbon dioxide. ▆Volunteers were told to think about yawning while they
breathed either normal air, pure oxygen, or an air mixture with an above-normal level of carbon dioxide. ▆If the
theory was correct, breathing air with extra carbon dioxide should have triggered yawning, while breathing pure
oxygen should have suppressed yawning. ▆In fact, neither condition made any difference to the frequency of
yawning, which remained constant at about 24 yawns per hour. ▆Another experiment demonstrated that physical
exercise, which was sufficiently vigorous to double the rate of breathing, had no effect on the frequency of
yawning. Again the implication is that yawning has little or nothing to do with oxygen.
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THERR answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The tiredness theory of yawning does not seem to
explain why yawning occurs.
A. Although earlier scientific studies strongly supported the tiredness theory, new evidence has cast doubt on
these findings.
B. Some have proposed that yawning plays a role in the development if lungs before birth but that it serves no
purpose in adults.
C. New studies, along with anecdotal evidence, have shown that the frequency of yawning increases during
extended periods of inactivity.
D. Evidence has shown that yawning is almost completely unrelated to amount of oxygen in the blood and is
unrelated to sleep behavior.
E. Fluids in the lungs of the prevent yawning from occurring, which disproves the developmental theory of
yawning.
F. There is some evidence that suggests that yawning prepares the body and mind for a change in activity level.
TPO18-3 Lightning
Lightning is a brilliant flash of light produced by an
electrical discharge from a storm cloud. The electrical
discharge takes place when the attractive tension
between a region of negatively charged particles and a
region of positively charged particles becomes so
great that the charged particles suddenly rush
together. The coming together of the oppositely
charged particles neutralizes the electrical tension and
releases a tremendous amount of energy, which we
see as lightning. The separation of positively and
negatively charged particles takes place during the
development of the storm cloud.
1.According to paragraph2, what causes ice crystal to
become positively charged?
A.Collisions with ice pellets
B.Collisions with negatively charged ice crystals at the
base of the cloud
C.Becoming concentrated in the central region of the
cloud
D.Forming at a temperature greater than -15 ℃2.The word “acquire”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.reject
B.obtain
C.need
D.produce
3.According to paragraph 2, why are positively
charged ice pellets produced in the lower part of the
cloud?
A.Collisions between ice crystals and ice pellets
increase in number in the lower part of the cloud.
B.The lower part of the cloud is smaller than the
region above it.
C.More ice pellets than ice crystals reach the lower
part of the cloud.
D.Temperature in the lower part of the cloud are
warmer than -15 ℃.
4.According to paragraph 2, the middle region of a
cloud becomes negatively charged due to all of the
following EXCEPT
A.a shift of electrical charged between ice pellets and
ice crystals
B.negatively charged ice pellets that remain in the
middle
C.a temperature of -15 ℃or less
D.the development of a positive charge at the base of
the cloud
5.It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that part of the
reason that the top of a storm cloud becomes
positively charged is that
A.the top of the cloud is warmer than the middle of
the cloud
The separation of charged particles that forms in a
storm cloud has a sandwich-like structure.
Concentrations of positively charged particles develop
at the top and bottom of the cloud, but the middle
region becomes negatively charged. Recent
measurements made in the field together with
laboratory simulations offer a promising explanation
of how this structure of charged particles forms. What
happens is that small (millimeter-to centimeter-size)
pellets of ice form in the cold upper regions of the
cloud. When these ice pellets fall, some of them strike
much smaller ice crystals in the center of the cloud.
The temperature at the center of the cloud is about
-15℃or lower. At such temperatures, the collision
between the ice pellets and the ice crystals causes
electrical charges to shift so that the ice pelletsacquire a negative charge and the ice crystals become
positively charged. Then updraft wind currents carry
the light, positively charged ice crystals up to the top
of the cloud. The heavier negatively charged ice
pellets are left to concentrate in the center. This
process explains why the top of the cloud becomes
positively charged, while the center becomes
negatively charged. The negatively charged region is
large: several hundred meters thick and several
kilometers in diameter. Below this large, cold,
negatively charged region, the cloud is warmer than
-15℃, and at these temperatures, collisions between
ice crystals and falling ice pellets produce positively
charged ice pellets that then populate a small region
at the base of the cloud.
B.the middle of the cloud is already occupied by
positively charged particles
C.the negatively charged ice pellets are too heavy to
be carried by the updrafts that move ice crystals
D.collisions between ice pellets in the top of the cloud
produce mainly positively charged particles6.The author remarks that “Lightning that strikes the
ground is the most likely to be destructive ”in order
to explain why
A.this form of lightning has been investigated so much
B.this form of lightning is not as common as lightning
within a cloud
C.scientific understanding of this form of lightning is
important
D.the buildup of positive charge on the ground
beneath a storm cloud can have serious consequences7.The word “illuminates ”in the passage is closet in
meaning to
A.opens
B.completes
C.lights
D.electrifies
Most lightning takes place within a cloud when the
charge separation within the cloud collapses. However,
as the storm cloud develops, the ground beneath the
cloud becomes positively charged and lightning can
take place in the form of an electrical discharge
between the negative charge of the cloud and thepositively charged ground. Lightning that strikes the
ground is the most likely to be destructive , so even
though it represents only 20 percent of all lightning, it
has received a lot of scientific attention.
Using high-speed photography, scientists have
determined that there are two steps to the occurrence
of lightning from a cloud to the ground. First, a
channel, or path, is formed that connects the cloud
and the ground. Then a strong current of electrons
follows that path from the cloud to the ground, and itis that current that illuminates the channel as the
lightning we see.
8.Which of the following claims about lightning strikes
can be inferred from paragraph 5?
A.During a lightning strike the diameter of the channel
the electrons follow is considerably enlarged beyond a
few centimeters.
B.A building is unlikely to be hit by lightning unless it is
at least 100 meters tall.
C.A building is hit by a lightning strike because the
building itself has first determined the path the
lightening then takes to it.
D.The light of a lightning strike first appears at the
point where the streams of negative and positive
particles meet.
9.The word “initiated” is closet in meaning to
A.started
B.intensified
C.finished
D.expected
The formation of the channel is initiated when
electrons surge from the cloud base toward the
ground. When a stream of these negatively charged
electrons comes within 100 meters of the ground it is
met by a stream of positively charged particles that
comes up from the ground. When the negatively and
positively charged streams meet, a complete channel
connecting the cloud and the ground is formed. The
channel is only a few centimeters in diameter, but that
is wide enough for electrons to follow the channel to
the ground in the visible form of a flash of lightning.
The stream of positive particles that meets the surge
of electrons from the cloud often arises from a tall
pointed structure such as a metal flagpole or a tower.
That is why the subsequent lightning that follows the
completed channel often strikes a tall structure.
Once a channel has been formed, it is usually used by
several lightning discharges, each of them consisting
of a stream of electrons from the cloud meeting a
stream of positive particles along the established path.
Sometimes, however, a stream of electrons following
an established channel is met by a positive stream
making a new path up from the ground. The result is a
forked lightning that strikes the ground in two places.
259The formation of the channel is initiated when electrons surge from the cloud base toward the ground. When a
stream of these negatively charged electrons comes within 100 meters of the ground it is met by a stream of
positively charged particles that comes up from the ground. When the negatively and positively charged streams
meet, a complete channel connecting the cloud and the ground is formed. The channel is only a few centimeters
in diameter, but that is wide enough for electrons to follow the channel to the ground in the visible form of a flash
of lightning. The stream of positive particles that meets the surge of electrons from the cloud often arises from a
tall pointed structure such as a metal flagpole or a tower. That is why the subsequent lightning that follows the
completed channel often strikes a tall structure. ▆
Once a channel has been formed, it is usually used by several lightning discharges, each of them consisting of a
stream of electrons from the cloud meeting a stream of positive particles along the established path. ▆
Sometimes, however, a stream of electrons following an established channel is met by a positive stream making a
new path up from the ground ▌. The result is a forked lightning that strikes the ground in two places. ▆
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THERR answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Lightning takes place when a separation of a positive
and negative electrical particles that develops in a storm could suddenly collapses.
A. A storm cloud first develops a positively charged layer at the top, then a negatively charged middle layer, and
finally, a positively charged layer at the bottom.
B. Lightning from cloud to ground follows a channel that forms when a stream of electrons moving down meets
a stream of positive particles coming up from the ground.
C. Lightning from a cloud to the ground is more likely to be destructive than is lightning that takes place within a
cloud.
D. A separation of oppositely charged particles in clouds develops from collisions of falling ice pellets with ice
crystals, from updrafts and from temperature variations.
E. Field studies laboratory simulations, and high-speed photography have all been used to investigate the way
charge separations develop in clouds.
F. Once a channel has been formed, it is usually used by several successive electrical discharges that illuminate
the channel as flashes of lightning.
TPO19
TPO19-1 The Roman Army's Impact on Britain
1.According to paragraph 1, the Roman army had the
most influence on those areas of Britain that were
A.conquered first
B.near population centers
C.used as military bases
D.rapidly incorporated into the empire
2.According to paragraph 1, what effect did military
occupation have on the local population?
A.It encouraged more even distribution of the
population and the settlement of previously
undeveloped territory.
B.It created discontent and made continuing military
occupation necessary.
C.It required local labor to construct forts and feed
and exercise the soldiers 'animals.
D.It provided local leaders with opportunities to
participate in governance.
In the wake of the Roman Empire's conquest of Britain
in the first century A.D., a large number of troops
stayed in the new province, and these troops had a
considerable impact on Britain with their camps,
fortifications, and participation in the local
economy. Assessing the impact of the army on the
civilian population starts from the realization that the
soldiers were always unevenly distributed across the
country. Areas rapidly incorporated into the empire
were not long affected by the military. Where the
army remained stationed, its presence was much
more influential. The imposition of a military base
involved the requisition of native lands for both the
fort and the territory needed to feed and exercise the
soldiers' animals. The imposition of military rule also
robbed local leaders of opportunities to participate in
local government, so social development was stunted
and the seeds of disaffection sown. This then meant
that the military had to remain to suppress rebellion
and organize government.
3.The word “friction” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.rebellion
B.conflict
C.neglect
D.crime4.The author mentions “ 343 men at one fort engaged
on tasks like shoemaking, building a bathhouse,
operating kilns, digging clay, and working lead” in
order to
A.describe the kinds of tasks soldiers were required to
perform as punishment for disloyalty or misdeeds
B.illustrate some of the duties assigned to soldiers to
keep them busy and well-behaved when not involved
in military campaigns
C.provide evidence that Roman soldiers had a
negative effect on the local area by performing jobs
that had been performed by native workers
D.argue that the soldiers would have been better
employed in the construction of infrastructure such as
roads
5.According to paragraph 3, how did the soldiers meet
their needs for goods and services?
A.Their needs were met by the army, and all of their
economic transactions took place within the fort.
B.Most of their needs were met by traveling
tradespeople who visit the forts.
C.During their days off, soldiers traveled to distant
towns to make purchases.
D.They bought what they needed from the artisans
and traders in nearby towns.
Economic exchange was clearly very important as the
Roman army brought with it very substantial spending
power. Locally a fort had two kinds of impact. Its large
population needed food and other supplies. Some of
these were certainly brought from long distances, but
demands were inevitably placed on the local area.
Although goods could be requisitioned, they were
usually paid for, and this probably stimulated changes
in the local economy. When not campaigning, soldiers
needed to be occupied; otherwise they represented apotentially dangerous source of friction and disloyalty.
Hence a writing tablet dated 25 April tells of 343 men
at one fort engaged on tasks like shoemaking,
building a bathhouse, operating kilns, digging clay,
and working lead. Such activities had a major effect
on the local area, in particular with the construction of
infrastructure such as roads, which improved access to
remote areas.
Each soldier received his pay, but in regions without a
developed economy there was initially little on which
it could be spent. The pool of excess cash rapidly
stimulated a thriving economy outside fort gates.
Some of the demand for the services and goods was
no doubt fulfilled by people drawn from far afield, but
some local people certainly became entwined in this
new economy. There was informal marriage with
soldiers, who until AD 197 were not legally entitled
to wed, and whole new communities grew up near the
forts. These settlements acted like small towns,
becoming centers for the artisan and trading
populations.
6.According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
true of Britain's auxiliary regiments of the Roman
army?
A.Membership in these regiments reached its highest
point during the region of the emperor Hadrian.
B.Most of the units recruited in Britain were sent to
Morocco and other stations outside Europe.
C.Soldiers served in the regiments for many years and
after retirement generally stayed where they had been
stationed.
D.Most of the regiments stationed on the frontier
were new units transferred from a neighboring
province.
7.According to paragraph 4, all of the following
changes could be seen in the frontier garrisons by the
later Roman period EXCEPT:
A.Membership in the units passed from father to son.
B.Fewer soldiers were stationed at the forts.
C.Soldiers usually were not transferred to different
locations.
D.Frontier units became more effective and proficient.
The army also provided a mean of personal
advancement for auxiliary soldiers recruited from the
native peoples, as a man obtained hereditary Roman
citizenship on retirement after service in an auxiliary
regiment. Such units recruited on an ad hoc (as
needed) basis from the area in which they were
stationed, and there was evidently large-scale
recruitment within Britain. The total numbers were at
least 12,500 men up to the reign of the emperor
Hadrian (A.D. 117-138), with a peak around A.D. 80.
Although a small proportion of the total population,
this perhaps had a massive local impact when a large
proportion of the young men were removed from an
area. Newly raised regiments were normally
transferred to another province from whence it was
unlikely that individual recruits would ever return.
Most units raised in Britain went elsewhere on the
European continent, although one is recorded in
Morocco. The reverse process brought young men to
Britain, where many continued to live after their 20 to
25 years of service, and this added to the
cosmopolitan Roman character of the frontier
population. By the later Roman period, frontier
garrisons (groups of soldiers) were only rarely
transferred, service in units became effectively
hereditary, and forts were no longer populated or
maintained at full strength.
8.Why does the author mention that “some of the
forts continued in occupation long after Rome ceased
to have any formal authority in Britain ”?
A.To emphasize the degree to which the stability of
the British northern frontier depended on firm
military control
B.To suggest that the Romans continued to occupy
Britain even after they had formally given up the right
to do so
C.To support the claim that forts continued to serve an
import economic function even after they ceased to
be of any military use
D.To describe one of the things that resulted from
frontier garrisons ' becoming part of the local
community over a long period
This process of settling in as a community over several
generations, combined with local recruitment,
presumably accounts for the apparent stability of the
British northern frontier in the later Roman period. Italso explains why some of the forts continued in
occupation long after Rome ceased to have any
formal authority in Britain , at the beginning of the
fifth century A.D. The circumstances that had allowed
natives to become Romanized also led the
self-sustaining military community of the frontier area
to become effectively British.
Economic exchange was clearly very important as the Roman army brought with it very substantial spending
power. Locally a fort had two kinds of impact. Its large population needed food and other supplies. ▆Some of
these were certainly brought from long distances, but demands were inevitably placed on the local area. ▆
Although goods could be requisitioned, they were usually paid for, and this probably stimulated changes in the
local economy. ▆When not campaigning, soldiers needed to be occupied; otherwise they represented a potentially
dangerous source of friction and disloyalty. ▆Hence a writing tablet dated 25 April tells of 343 men at one fort
engaged on tasks like shoemaking, building a bathhouse, operating kilns, digging clay, and working lead. Such
activities had a major effect on the local area, in particular with the construction of infrastructure such as roads,
which improved access to remote areas.
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentence do not belong to the summary because they express ideas that are no presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The Roman army's occupation of Britain influenced
and changed the local population.
A. Although the presence of the army in certain areas caused resentment among the local population, it
provided important services such as building infrastructure.
B. By recruiting unemployed young men for its auxiliary units, the army made it possible for them to stay in their
home towns and provide financial support for their families.
C. Large quantities of cash from soldiers' pay stimulated development, but also drove up prices, making it hard
for local residents to afford goods and services.
D. Though the army appropriated land and some goods, it also paid for many supplies, stimulating local
economic growth.
E. The forts contributed to the quality of local crafts by bringing in artisans from distant places who brought with
them new skills and techniques.
F. Roman soldiers started families with local inhabitants, and over the generations, the military community
became a stable part of British society.
TPO19-2 Succession Climax and Ecosystems
1.According to paragraph 2, which of the following is a
criticism of Clements' view of succession?
A.The principles of succession are more lawlike than
Clements thought they are.
B.More evidence is needed to establish Clements'
predictions about succession.
C.The details of succession are affected by random
processes.
D.Many of the factors that determine which plants will
grow in an environment, such as the nature of the soil
and the exposure to sun, do not change at all.
2.The word “substantiated ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.confirmed
B.noticed
C.defined
D.publicized
In the late nineteenth century, ecology began to grow
into an independent science from its roots in natural
history and plant geography. The emphasis of this new
"community ecology" was on the composition and
structure of communities consisting of different
species. In the early twentieth century, the American
ecologist Frederic Clements pointed out that a
succession of plant communities would develop after
a disturbance such as a volcanic eruption, heavy flood,
or forest fire. An abandoned field, for instance, will be
invaded successively by herbaceous plants (plants
with little or no woody tissue), shrubs, and trees,
eventually becoming a forest. Light-loving species are
always among the first invaders, while shade-tolerant
species appear later in the succession.
♦Clements and other early ecologists saw almost
lawlike regularity in the order of succession, but thathas not been substantiated . A general trend can be
recognized, but the details are usually unpredictable.
Succession is influenced by many factors: the nature
of the soil, exposure to sun and wind, regularity of
precipitation, chance colonizations, and many other
random processes.
3.he word “likewise”in the passage is closest in
meaning to A.sometimes
B.similarly
C.apparently
D.consequently4.The word “legitimately ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.commonly
B.broadly
C.properly
D.officially
The final stage of a succession, called the climax by
Clements and early ecologists, is likewise not
predictable or of uniform composition. There is
usually a good deal of turnover in species composition,
even in a mature community. The nature of the climax
is influenced by the same factors that influenced
succession. Nevertheless, mature natural
environments are usually in equilibrium. They change
relatively little through time unless the environment
itself changes.
For Clements, the climax was a "superorganism," an
organic entity. Even some authors who accepted the
climax concept rejected Clements' characterization of
it as a superorganism, and it is indeed a misleadingmetaphor. An ant colony may be legitimately called a
superorganism because its communication system is
so highly organized that the colony always works as a
whole and appropriately according to the
circumstances. But there is no evidence for such an
interacting communicative network in a climax plant
formation. Many authors prefer the term
"association" to the term "community" in order to
stress the looseness of the interaction.
5.In paragraph 5, the author challenges the idea of a
“biome”by noting that
A.there are usually no very strong connections among
the plants and animals living in a place
B.plants and animals respond in the same way to the
same circumstances
C.particular combinations of flora and fauna do not
generally come about purely by chance
D.some animals are dependent on specific kinds of
plants for food.
6.Why does the author make the statement, “Indeed,
there are vast areas of spruce forest without
moose”?A.To highlight a fact whose significance the
ecologist Herbert Gleason had missed
B.To propose the idea that a spruce forest is by itself a
superorganism
C.To emphasize that moose are not limited to a single
kind of environment
D.To criticize the idea of a spruce-moose biome
7.According to paragraph 5, Gleason 's opposition to
the Clementsian views of plant ecology was based on
the claim that plant species grow in places where
A.they can enter into mutually beneficial relationships
with other species
B.conditions suit them, regardless of whether
particular other species are present
C.habitats are available for a wide variety of plant and
animal species
D.their requirements are met, and those of most other
species are not
Even less fortunate was the extension of this type of
thinking to include animals as well as plants. This
resulted in the "biome, " a combination of coexisting
flora and fauna. Though it is true that many animals
are strictly associated with certain plants, it is
misleading to speak of a "spruce-moose biome," for
example, because there is no internal cohesion to
their association as in an organism. The spruce
community is not substantially affected by either thepresence or absence of moose. Indeed, there are vast
areas of spruce forest without moose. The opposition
to the Clementsian concept of plant ecology was
initiated by Herbert Gleason, soon joined by various
other ecologists. Their major point was that the
distribution of a given species was controlled by the
habitat requirements of that species and that
therefore the vegetation types were a simple
consequence of the ecologies of individual plant
species.
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Unlike the terms “climax”,“biome,”and
“superorganism, ” which refer to the particular
association of plants and animals at a given location,
the term “ecosystem ” refers specifically to the
physical factors within an environment.
B.The terms “climax,”“ biome,”“ superorganism, ”
and“ecosystem ”all refer to the system of plants and
animals in an associated environment, but some are
more controversial than others.
C.When the older terms of ecology became too
technical, they were replaced by the more popular
and more widely used term “ecosystem. ”
D.The term “ecosystem ” gradually replaced
discredited terms for the combination of a physical
environment and the plants and animals living
together in it.
With "climax," "biome," "superorganism," and
various other technical terms for the association of
animals and plants at a given locality being criticized,
the term "ecosystem" was more and more widely
adopted for the whole system of associated
organisms together with the physical factors of their
environment. Eventually, the energy-transforming role
of such a system was emphasized. Ecosystems thus
involve the circulation, transformation, and
accumulation of energy and matter through the
medium of living things and their activities. The
ecologist is concerned primarily with the quantities of
matter and energy that pass through a given
ecosystem, and with the rates at which they do so.
Although the ecosystem concept was very popular in
the 1950s and 1960s, it is no longer the dominant
paradigm. Gleason's arguments against climax and
biome are largely valid against ecosystems as well.
Furthermore, the number of interactions is so great
that they are difficult to analyze, even with the help of
large computers. Finally, younger ecologists have
found ecological problems involving behavior and
life-history adaptations more attractive than
measuring physical constants. Nevertheless, one still
speaks of the ecosystem when referring to a local
association of animals and plants, usually without
paying much attention to the energy aspects.
269Although the ecosystem concept was very popular in the 1950s and 1960s, it is no longer the dominant paradigm.
▆Gleason's arguments against climax and biome are largely valid against ecosystems as well. ▆Furthermore, the
number of interactions is so great that they are difficult to analyze, even with the help of large computers. Finally,
younger ecologists have found ecological problems involving behavior and life-history adaptations more attractive
than measuring physical constants. ▆Nevertheless, one still speaks of the ecosystem when referring to a local
association of animals and plants, usually without paying much attention to the energy aspects. ▆
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provied below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The study of the combination of plant species that
inhabit a particular locality became a scientific discipline toward the end of the nineteenth century.
A. Areas that are recovering from serious disturbances like volcanic eruptions and heavy floods provide special
opportunities to observe the development of plant communities.
B. Whether a given species will be found in a given ecosystem strongly depends on what other species it would
interact with in that ecosystem.
C. Computer-aided studies of entire system of associated organisms together with their environment provide a
solid basis for current studies of specific ecological problems.
D. According to the earliest theories of ecology, the development of plant communities proceeds in lawlike
fashion and results in stable climax communities.
E. The idea of associations of plants and animals that function as “superorganisms ”was later rejected by
biologists who saw no strong evidence in support of that idea.
F. The once popular idea of communities as integrated ecosystems has been largely rejected by modern
ecologists, who are more interested in problems involving behavior and adaptations.
TPO19-3 Discovering the Ice Ages
1.The word “ heterogeneous ” in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.remaining
B.varied
C.familiar
D.layered
2.According to paragraph 1, what persuaded Louis
Agassiz that glaciation in the past had been
widespread?
A.Geologic differences between mountain valleys and
flat plains
B.The presence of similar glacial material in many
different regions
C.Geologic research on mountain glaciers in the Alps
D.Evidence of regional differences in the drift caused
by glacial erosion
In the middle of the nineteenth century, Louis Agassiz,
one of the first scientists to study glaciers, immigrated
to the United States from Switzerland and became a
professor at Harvard University, where he continued
his studies in geology and other sciences. For his
research, Agassiz visited many places in the northern
parts of Europe and North America, from the
mountains of Scandinavia and New England to the
rolling hills of the American Midwest. In all these
diverse regions, Agassiz saw signs of glacial erosion
and sedimentation. In flat plains country, he saw
moraines (accumulations of earth and loose rock that
form at the edges of glaciers) that reminded him of
the terminal moraines found at the end of valley
glaciers in the Alps. The heterogeneous material of
the drift (sand, clay, and rocks deposited there)
convinced him of its glacial origin.
3.The word “enjoy”in the passage is closest in
meaning to A.experience
B.resemble
C.expect
D.dominate
4.It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that Agassiz and
other geologists of his time were not able to
determine
A.which geographic regions had been covered with ice
sheets in the last ice age
B.the exact dates at which drifts had been deposited
during the last ice age
C.the exact composition of the drifts laid during the
last ice age
D.how far south along the east coast of the United
States the ice had advanced during the last ice age
The areas covered by this material were so vast that
the ice that deposited it must have been a continental
glacier larger than Greenland or Antarctica. Eventually,
Agassiz and others convinced geologists and the
general public that a great continental glaciation had
extended the polar ice caps far into regions that nowenjoy temperate climates. For the first time, people
began to talk about ice ages. It was also apparent that
the glaciation occurred in the relatively recent past
because the drift was soft, like freshly deposited
sediment. We now know the age of the glaciation
accurately from radiometric dating of the carbon-14 in
logs buried in the drift. The drift of the last glaciation
was deposited during one of the most recent epochs
of geologic time, the Pleistocene, which lasted from
1.8 million to 10,000 years ago. Along the east coast of
the United States, the southernmost advance of this
ice is recorded by the enormous sand and drift
deposits of the terminal moraines that form Long
Island and Cape Cod.
It soon became clear that there were multiple glacial
ages during the Pleistocene, with warmer interglacial
intervals between them. As geologists mapped glacial
deposits in the late nineteenth century, they became
aware that there were several layers of drift, the lower
ones corresponding to earlier ice ages. Between the
older layers of glacial material were well-developed
soils containing fossils of warm-climate plants. These
soils were evidence that the glaciers retreated as the
climate warmed. By the early part of the twentieth
century, scientists believed that four distinct
glaciations had affected North America and Europe
during the Pleistocene epoch.
5.According to paragraph 4, scientists use foraminifera
shells to learn about Pleistocene ocean conditions by
A.measuring the amount of calcium carbonate present
in the shells
B.determining the proportion of shell in each layer of
sediment
C.comparing shells deposited during the Pleistocene
with those buried earlier
D.calculating the relative quantity of two oxygen
isotopes in the calcite
This idea was modified in the late twentieth century,
when geologists and oceanographers examining
oceanic sediment found fossil evidence of warming
and cooling of the oceans. Ocean sediments
presented a much more complete geologic record of
the Pleistocene than continental glacial deposits did.
The fossils buried in Pleistocene and earlier ocean
sediments were of foraminifera —small, single-celled
marine organisms that secrete shells of calcium
carbonate, or calcite. These shells differ in their
proportion of ordinary oxygen (oxygen-16) and the
heavy oxygen isotope (oxygen-18). The ratio of
oxygen-16 to oxygen-18 found in the calcite of a
foraminifer's shell depends on the temperature of the
water in which the organism lived. Different ratios in
the shells preserved in various layers of sedimentreveal the temperature changes in the oceans during
the Pleistocene epoch.
6.In can be inferred from paragraph 5 that
foraminifera fossil shells containing calcite with high
percentages of oxygen-16 were deposited at times
when
A.polar ice extended as far as equatorial regions of
land and sea
B.extensive glaciation was not occurring
C.there were no great increases in ocean temperature
D.there was heavy snowfall on continental glaciers
7.In paragraph 5, why does the author include theinformation that the “oxygen isotope ratio of the
ocean changes as a great deal of water is withdrawn
from it by evaporation and is precipitated as snow to
form glacial ice ”?
A.To explain how scientists were able to calculate how
frequently the continental ice sheets expanded and
contracted
B.To explain how scientists have determined that there
was no great change in ocean temperatures at the
equator during past glaciations
C.To provide evidence that oxygen-16 has a greater
tendency to evaporate than does oxygen-18
D.To suggest that equatorial marine organisms absorb
more heavy isotopes than do marine organisms
elsewhere
8.According to the passage, when did scientists begin
to realize that more than one ice age had occurred ?
A.In the mid nineteenth century
B.In the late nineteenth century
C.In the early twentieth century
D.In the late twentieth century
Isotopic analysis of shells allowed geologists to
measure another glacial effect. They could trace the
growth and shrinkage of continental glaciers, even in
parts of the ocean where there may have been no
great change in temperature—around the equator, forexample. The oxygen isotope ratio of the ocean
changes as a great deal of water is withdrawn from it
by evaporation and is precipitated as snow to form
glacial ice. During glaciations, the lighter oxygen-16
has a greater tendency to evaporate from the ocean
surface than the heavier oxygen-18 does. Thus, more
of the heavy isotope is left behind in the ocean and
absorbed by marine organisms. From this analysis of
marine sediments, geologists have learned that there
were many shorter, more regular cycles of glaciation
and deglaciation than geologists had recognized from
the glacial drift of the continents alone.
274In the middle of the nineteenth century, Louis Agassiz, one of the first scientists to study glaciers, immigrated to
the United States from Switzerland and became a professor at Harvard University, where he continued his studies
in geology and other sciences. For his research, Agassiz visited many places in the northern parts of Europe and
North America, from the mountains of Scandinavia and New England to the rolling hills of the American Midwest.
▆In all these diverse regions, Agassiz saw signs of glacial erosion and sedimentation. ▆In flat plains country, he
saw moraines (accumulations of earth and loose rock that form at the edges of glaciers) that reminded him of the
terminal moraines found at the end of valley glaciers in the Alps. ▆The heterogeneous material of the drift (sand,
clay, and rocks deposited there) convinced him of its glacial origin. ▆
9.Look at the four squares ▆that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit ?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Louis Agassiz was the first to note signs of glacial
erosion and sedimentation in diverse regions of Europe and North America.
A. Evidence of a pattern of glacier-like deposits eventually convinced most geologists that an enormous
continental glacier had extended into the temperate zone.
B. Glacial research showed that many layers of ice were deposited, with each new period of glaciation extending
farther south than the one before.
C. Isotopic analysis of marine sediments showed that periods of glaciation and deglaciation were more frequent,
shorter, and more cyclic than previously thought.
D. Nineteenth-century geologists came to accept the idea that the areas covered by polar ice had reached as far
as the equator, a far larger area than Agassiz had thought.
E. Nineteenth-century geologists studying the layers of drift concluded that during the Pleistocene epoch,
several glaciations had occurred with warm periods between them.
F. Research involving foraminifera fossil shells show that ocean temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere varied
greatly during the most extensive periods of glaciation.
TPO20
TPO20-1 Westward Migration
1.What is the purpose of the statement, “Whereas in
1810 only a seventh of the American people lived west
of the Appalachian Mountains, by 1840 more than a
third lived there”?
A.To illustrate that generally population shifts occur
rapidly
B.To correct a mistaken impression of American
agriculture from 1810 to 1840
C.To emphasize the range and speed with which the
westward migration occurred
D.To demonstrated how attractive the Appalachian
Mountains were to Americans
The story of the westward movement of population in
the United States is, in the main, the story of the
expansion of American agriculture—of the
development of new areas for the raising of livestock
and the cultivation of wheat, corn, tobacco, and
cotton. After 1815 improved transportation enabled
more and more western farmers to escape a
self-sufficient way of life and enter a national market
economy. During periods when commodity prices
were high, the rate of westward migration increased
spectacularly. "Old America seemed to be breaking up
and moving westward," observed an English visitor in
1817,during the first great wave of migration.
Emigration to the West reached a peak in the 1830's.
Whereas in 1810 only a seventh of the American
people lived west of the Appalachian Mountains, by
1840 more than a third lived there.
2. According to paragraph 2, all of the following are
reasons why Americans migrated westward EXCEPT
A.the desire to move from one place to the next
B.the hope of improving their socioeconomic status
C.the opportunity to change jobs
D.the need to escape religious or political crises
Why were these hundreds of thousands of
settlers—most of them farmers, some of them
artisans—drawn away from the cleared fields and
established cities and villages of the East? Certain
characteristics of American society help to explain this
remarkable migration. The European ancestors of
some Americans had for centuries lived rooted to the
same village or piece of land until some religious,
political, or economic crisis uprooted them and drove
them across the Atlantic. Many of those who
experienced this sharp break thereafter lacked the ties
that had bound them and their ancestors to a single
place. Moreover, European society was relatively
stratified; occupation and social status were inherited.
In American society, however, the class structure was
less rigid; some people changed occupations easily
and believed it was their duty to improve their social
and economic position. As a result, many Americans
were an inveterately restless, rootless, and ambitious
people. Therefore, these social traits helped to
produce the nomadic and daring settlers who keptpushing westward beyond the fringes of settlement. In
addition, there were other immigrants who migrated
west in search of new homes, material success, and
better lives.
3.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Because the West had more rivers and forests than
the East, its soil was more productive.
B.The fertile soils of the West drew farmers from
regions with barren soils.
C.Farmers living in western areas of the United States
were more affected by soil erosion than farmers living
in eastern areas.
D.The soil in western areas of the United States was
richer than soil in eastern areas.
4.According to paragraph 3, what was the significance
of the land law passed in 1820?
A.It granted government-supported loans to farmers.
B.It provided farmland at an affordable price.
C.It required banks to offer loans to farmers.
D.It enabled farmers to sell their land for a profit.
8.Paragraph 4 suggests that turnpikes affected farmers
by
A.making the price of grain uniform for both eastern
and western farmers
B.making western farm products more profitable than
eastern farm products
C.allowing farmers to drive their livestock across
mountain trails
D.allowing a greater number of farmers to sell their
farm products in a commercial market
The West had plenty of attractions: the alluvial river
bottoms, the fecund soils of the rolling forest lands,
the black loams of the prairies were tempting to New
England farmers working their rocky, sterile land and
to southeastern farmers plagued with soil depletion
and erosion. In 1820 under a new land law, a farm
could be bought for $100. The continued proliferation
of banks made it easier for those without cash to
negotiate loans in paper money. Western Farmers
borrowed with the confident expectation that the
expanding economy would keep farm prices high, thus
making it easy to repay loans when they fell due.
Transportation was becoming less of a problem for
those who wished to move west and for those who
hand farm surpluses to send to market. Prior to 1815,
western farmers who did not live on navigable
waterways were connected to them only by dirt roads
and mountain trails. Livestock could be driven across
the mountains, but the cost of transporting bulky
grains in this fashion was several times greater than
their value in eastern markets. The first step toward an
improvement of western transportation was the
construction of turnpikes. These roads made possible
a reduction in transportation costs and thus
stimulated the commercialization of agriculture along
their routes.
6.The word "superseded" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.replaced
B.reformed
C.equaled
D.increased7.The word "diverted" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.collected
B.shifted
C.transported
D.sold
8.Paragraph 5 mentions that the Erie Canal led to a
reduction in all of the following EXCEPT
A.the length of the route that goods from the West
traveled across to reach eastern markets
B.the cost of transporting freight
C.the price of produce from western states
D.the amount of produce from western states that
was shipped on rivers
Two other developments presaged the end of the era
of turnpikes and started a transportation revolution
that resulted in increased regional specialization and
the growth of a national market economy. First came
the steamboat; although flatboats and keelboats
continued to be important until the 1850's steamboatseventually superseded all other craft in the carrying of
passengers and freight. Steamboats were not only
faster but also transported upriver freight for about
one tenth of what it had previously cost on
hand-propelled keelboats. Next came the Erie Canal,
an enormous project in its day, spanning about 350
miles. After the canal went into operation, the cost
per mile of transporting a ton of freight from Buffalo
to New York City declined from nearly 20 cents to lessthan 1 cent. Eventually, the western states diverted
much of their produce from the rivers to the Erie
Canal, a shorter route to eastern markets.
279Transportation was becoming less of a problem for those who wished to move west and for those who hand farm
surpluses to send to market. Prior to 1815, western farmers who did not live on navigable waterways were
connected to them only by dirt roads and mountain trails. Livestock could be driven across the mountains, but
the cost of transporting bulky grains in this fashion was several times greater than their value in eastern markets.
The first step toward an improvement of western transportation was the construction of turnpikes. These
roads made possible a reduction in transportation costs and thus stimulated the commercialization of agriculture
along their routes.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [] to insert the sentence in the passage.
In fact, goods could be shipped more cheaply across the much greater distance of the Atlantic Ocean than they
could from western New York to coastal cities.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The westward movement of population across the
United States led to expanded agricultural production.
A. The desire to improve their livelihood often inspired people to move west.
B. The fertility of western farmland as well as favorable government policies supported agricultural gains.
C. Commercial farming in the West was greatly enhanced by improvements in land and water transportation.
D. Among the people who moved to the western United States were a number of artisans.
E. Steamboats were originally used to transport passengers rather than freight.
F. The transportation revolution resulted in regional economies that operated independently of a national market
economy.
TPO20-2 Early Settlements in the Southwest Asia
1.The word "momentous" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.numerous
B.regular
C.very important
D.very positive
2.The phrase "this remarkable change" in the passage
refers to
A.warming at the end of the Ice Age
B.shifts in mountain snow lines
C.the movement of people from farms to villages
D.a dramatic increase in the population
The universal global warming at the end of the Ice Age
had dramatic effects on temperate regions of Asia,
Europe, and North America. Ice sheets retreated and
sea levels rose. The climatic changes in southwestern
Asia were more subtle, in that they involved shifts in
mountain snow lines, rainfall patterns, and vegetation
cover. However, these same cycles of change hadmomentous impacts on the sparse human populations
of the region. At the end of the Ice Age, no more than
a few thousand foragers lived along the eastern
Mediterranean coast, in the Jordan and Euphrates
valleys. Within 2,000 years, the human population of
the region numbered in the tens of thousands, all as a
result of village life and farming. Thanks to new
environmental and archaeological discoveries, we nowknow something about this remarkable change in local
life.
3.The word "exploited" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.explored
B.utilized
C.inhabited
D.improved
4.Why does the author mention "seashells, stone
bowls, and artifacts made of obsidian"?
A.To give examples of objects obtained through trade
with other societies
B.To illustrate the kinds of objects that are preserved
in a cool climate
C.To provide evidence that the organization of work
was specialized
D.To give examples of the artistic ability of local
populations
5.The word "cramped" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.primitive
B.secure
C.extended
D.confined
6.Paragraph 3 suggests which of the following about
the settlement of Abu Hureyra?
A.The settlement was inhabited by small groups of
people from nearby areas.
B.Small bands of people migrated in and out of the
settlement.
C.The location of the settlement made permanent
development difficult.
D.The easy availability of food led to the growth of the
settlement.
Pollen samples from freshwater lakes in Syria and
elsewhere tell us forest cover expanded rapidly at the
end of the Ice Age, for the southwestern Asian climate
was still cooler and considerably wetter than today.
Many areas were richer in animal and plant species
than they are now, making them highly favorable for
human occupation. About 9000 B.C., most human
settlements lay in the area along the Mediterranean
coast and in the Zagros Mountains of Iran and their
foothills. Some local areas, like the Jordan River valley,
the middle Euphrates valley, and some Zagros valleys,
were more densely populated than elsewhere. Here
more sedentary and more complex societiesflourished. These people exploited the landscape
intensively, foraging on hill slopes for wild cereal
grasses and nuts, while hunting gazelle and other
game on grassy lowlands and in river valleys. Theirsettlements contain exotic objects such as seashells,
stone bowls, and artifacts made of obsidian (volcanic
glass), all traded from afar. This considerable volume
of intercommunity exchange brought a degree of
social complexity in its wake.
Thanks to extremely fine-grained excavation and
extensive use of flotation methods (through which
seeds are recovered from soil samples), we know a
great deal about the foraging practices of the
inhabitants of Abu Hureyra in Syria's Euphrates valley.
Abu Hureyra was founded about 9500B.C, a smallvillage settlement of cramped pit dwellings (houses
dug partially in the soil) with reed roofs supported by
wooden uprights. For the next 1,500 years, its
inhabitants enjoyed a somewhat warmer and damper
climate than today, living in a well-wooded steppe
area where wild cereal grasses were abundant. They
subsisted off spring migrations of Persian gazelles from
the south. With such a favorable location, about 300
to 400 people lived in a sizable, permanent settlement.
They were no longer a series of small bands but lived
in a large community with more elaborate social
organization, probably grouped into clans of people of
common descent.
7.According to paragraph 5, after 7000 B.C. the
settlement of Abu Hureyra differed from earlier
settlements at that location in all of the following
EXCEPT
A.the domestication of animals
B.the intensive hunting of gazelle
C.the size of the settlement
D.the design of the dwellings
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.In many areas besides Abu Hureyra, complex factors
led to new economies including the herding of
domestic stock.
B.In 'Ain Ghazal and Syria, domestic stock was more
important than it was at Abu Hureyra.
C.Once early methods of herding animals improved,
new economies were adopted.
D.Many complex theories attempt to explain the early
domestication of animals.
The flotation samples from the excavations allowed
botanists to study shifts in plant-collecting habits as if
they were looking through a telescope at a changing
landscape. Hundreds of tiny plant remains show how
the inhabitants exploited nut harvests in nearby
pistachio and oak forests. However, as the climate
dried up, the forests retreated from the vicinity of the
settlement. The inhabitants turned to wild cereal
grasses instead, collecting them by the thousands,
while the percentage of nuts in the diet fell. By
8200B.C., drought conditions were so severe that the
people abandoned their long-established settlement,
perhaps dispersing into smaller camps.
Five centuries later, about 7700B.C., a new village rose
on the mound. At first the inhabitants still hunted
gazelle intensively. Then, about 7000 B.C., within thespace of a few generations, they switched abruptly to
herding domesticated goats and sheep and to growing
einkorn, pulses, and other cereal grasses. Abu Hureyra
grew rapidly until it covered nearly 30 acres. It was a
close-knit community of rectangular, one-story
mud-brick houses, joined by narrow lanes andcourtyards, finally abandoned about 5000 B.C.. Many
complex factors led to the adoption of the new
economies, not only at Abu Hureyra, but at many
other locations such as 'Ain Ghazal, also in Syria,
where goat toe bones showing the telltale marks of
abrasion caused by foot tethering (binding) testify to
early herding of domestic stock.
283The universal global warming at the end of the Ice Age had dramatic effects on temperate regions of Asia, Europe,
and North America. Ice sheets retreated and sea levels rose. The climatic changes in southwestern Asia were
more subtle, in that they involved shifts in mountain snow lines, rainfall patterns, and vegetation cover. ▍
However, these same cycles of change had momentous impacts on the sparse human populations of the region.
▍At the end of the Ice Age, no more than a few thousand foragers lived along the eastern Mediterranean coast,
in the Jordan and Euphrates valleys. Within 2,000 years, the human population of the region numbered in the tensof thousands, all as a result of village life and farming. Thanks to new environmental and archaeological
discoveries, we now know something about this remarkable change in local life.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
One of the major effects was the rapid growth of the human population itself.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. At the end of the Ice Age, patterns of human
settlement changed in southwestern Asia.
A. Wild cereals, grasses, and nuts were exchanged for exotic objects.
B. Social organization in Abu Hureyra decreased as the population grew.
C. Within 2,000 years, populations in southwestern Asia greatly increased in number.
D. Changes in climatic conditions made southwestern Asia highly beneficial to human occupants.
E. The favorable location of Abu Hureyra kept the city from experiencing hardship during drought years.
F. In rich, fertile areas permanent societies evolved to a high level of complexity.
TPO20-3 Fossil Preservation
1.The word "agencies" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.combinations
B.problems
C.forces
D.changes
2.In paragraph 1, what is the author's purpose in
providing examples of how organisms are destroyed?
A.To emphasize how surprising it is that so many
fossils exist
B.To introduce a new geologic theory of fossil
preservation
C.To explain why the fossil record until now has
remained incomplete
D.To compare how fossils form on land and in water3.Why does the author mention "aragonite" in the
passage?
A.To emphasize that some fossils remain unaltered for
millions of years
B.To contrast fossil formation in organisms with soft
tissue and in organisms with hard shells
C.To explain that some marine organisms must
undergo chemical changes in order to fossilize
D.To explain why fossil shells are more likely to survive
than are fossil skeletons
When one considers the many ways by which
organisms are completely destroyed after death, it is
remarkable that fossils are as common as they are.
Attack by scavengers and bacteria, chemical decay,
and destruction by erosion and other geologicagencies make the odds against preservation very high.
However, the chances of escaping complete
destruction are vastly improved if the organism
happens to have a mineralized skeleton and dies in a
place where it can be quickly buried by sediment.
Both of these conditions are often found on the ocean
floors, where shelled invertebrates (organisms without
spines) flourish and are covered by the continuous
rain of sedimentary particles. Although most fossils
are found in marine sedimentary rocks, they also are
found in terrestrial deposits left by streams and lakes.
On occasion, animals and plants have been preserved
after becoming immersed in tar or quicksand, trapped
in ice or lava flows, or engulfed by rapid falls of
volcanic ash.
The term "fossil" often implies petrifaction, literally a
transformation into stone. After the death of an
organism, the soft tissue is ordinarily consumed by
scavengers and bacteria. The empty shell of a snail or
clam may be left behind, and if it is sufficiently durable
and resistant to dissolution, it may remain basically
unchanged for a long period of time. Indeed,
unaltered shells of marine invertebrates are known
from deposits over 100 million years old. In many
marine creatures, however, the skeleton is composed
of a mineral variety of calcium carbonate calledaragonite. Although aragonite has the same
composition as the more familiar mineral known as
calcite, it has a different crystal form, is relatively
unstable, and in time changes to the more stable
calcite.
4.Which of the following best explains the process of
permineralization mentioned in paragraph 3?
A.Water containing calcium carbonate circulates
through a shell and deposits sediment.
B.Liquid containing chemicals hardens an already
existing fossil structure.
C.Water passes through sediment surrounding a fossil
and removes its chemical content.
D.A chemical substance enters a fossil and changes its
shape.
5.Paragraph 5 suggests which of the following about
the carbonization process?
A.It is completed soon after an organism dies.
B.It does not occur in hard-shell organisms.
C.It sometimes allows soft-tissued organisms to be
preserved with all their parts.
D.It is a more precise process of preservation than is
replacement.
Many other processes may alter the shell of a clam or
snail and enhance its chances for preservation. Water
containing dissolved silica, calcium carbonate, or iron
may circulate through the enclosing sediment and be
deposited in cavities such as marrow cavities and
canals in bone once occupied by blood vessels and
nerves. In such cases, the original composition of the
bone or shell remains, but the fossil is made harder
and more durable. This addition of a chemically
precipitated substance into pore spaces is termed
"permineralization."
6.The word "prospect" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.completion
B.variety
C.possibility
D.speed
Petrifaction may also involve a simultaneous exchange
of the original substance of a dead plant or animal
with mineral matter of a different composition. This
process is termed " replacement" because solutions
have dissolved the original material and replaced it
with an equal volume of the new substance.
Replacement can be a marvelously precise process, so
that details of shell ornamentation, tree rings in wood,
and delicate structures in bone are accurately
preserved.
Another type of fossilization, known as carbonization,
occurs when soft tissues are preserved as thin films of
carbon. Leaves and tissue of soft-bodied organisms
such as jellyfish or worms may accumulate, become
buried and compressed, and lose their volatile
constituents. The carbon often remains behind as a
blackened silhouette.
Although it is certainly true that the possession ofhard parts enhances the prospect of preservation,
organisms having soft tissues and organs are also
occasionally preserved. Insects and even small
invertebrates have been found preserved in the
hardened resins of conifers and certain other trees.
X-ray examination of thin slabs of rock sometimes
reveals the ghostly outlines of tentacles, digestive
tracts, and visual organs of a variety of marine
creatures. Soft parts, including skin, hair, and viscera
of ice age mammoths, have been preserved in frozen
soil or in the oozing tar of oil seeps.
7.According to paragraph 7, how do environments
containing oxygen affect fossil preservation?
A.They increase the probability that soft-tissued
organisms will become fossils.
B.They lead to more bacteria production.
C.They slow the rate at which clay and silt are
deposited.
D.They reduce the chance that animal remains will be
preserved.
8.According to the passage, all of the following assist
in fossil preservation EXCEPT
A.the presence of calcite in an organism's skeleton
B.the presence of large open areas along an ocean
floor
C.the deposition of a fossil in sticky substances such as
sap or tar
D.the rapid burial of an organism under layers of silt
The probability that actual remains of soft tissue will
be preserved is improved if the organism dies in an
environment of rapid deposition and oxygen
deprivation. Under such conditions, the destructive
effects of bacteria are diminished. The Middle Eocene
Messel Shale (from about 48 million years ago) of
Germany accumulated in such an environment. The
shale was deposited in an oxygen-deficient lake where
lethal gases sometimes bubbled up and killed animals.
Their remains accumulated on the floor of the lake
and were then covered by clay and silt. Among the
superbly preserved Messel fossils are insects with
iridescent exoskeletons (hard outer coverings), frogs
with skin and blood vessels intact, and even entire
small mammals with preserved fur and soft tissue.
Another type of fossilization, known as carbonization, occurs when soft tissues are preserved as thin films of
carbon. Leaves and tissue of soft-bodied organisms such as jellyfish or worms may accumulate, become
buried and compressed, and lose their volatile constituents. The carbon often remains behind as a blackened
silhouette.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
But the evidence of past organic life is not limited to petrifaction.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The remains of ancient life are amazingly well
preserved in the form of fossils
A. Environmental characteristics like those present on ocean floors increase the likelihood that plant and animal
fossils will occur.
B. The shells of organisms can be preserved by processes of chemical precipitation or mineral exchange.
C. Comparatively few fossils are found in the terrestrial deposits of streams and lakes.
D. Fossils are more likely to the preserved in shale deposits than in deposits of clay and silt.
E. Freezing enables the soft parts of organisms to survive longer than the hard parts.
F. Thin films of carbon may remain as an indication of soft tissue or actual tissue may be preserved if exposure to
bacteria is limited.
TPO21
TPO21-1 Geothermal Energy
1. The word "practical " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.usable
B.plentiful
C.economical
D.familiar
2. According to paragraph 2, which of the following is
true about heat reservoirs with a temperature in the
range of 80°to 180°centigrade?
A.They are under international control.
B.They are more common than reservoirs that have a
higher temperature.
C.Few of them produce enough heat to warm large
industrial spaces.
D.They are used to generate electricity.
Paragraph1: Earth's internal heat, fueled by
radioactivity, provides the energy for plate tectonics
and continental drift, mountain building, and
earthquakes. It can also be harnessed to drive electric
generators and heat homes. Geothermal energybecomes available in a practical form when
underground heat is transferred by water that is
heated as it passes through a subsurface region of hot
rocks (a heat reservoir) that may be hundreds or
thousands of feet deep. The water is usually naturally
occurring groundwater that seeps down along
fractures in the rock; less typically, the water is
artificially introduced by being pumped down from
the surface. The water is brought to the surface, as a
liquid or steam, through holes drilled for the purpose.
Paragraph2: By far the most abundant form of
geothermal energy occurs at the relatively low
temperatures of 80°to 180°centigrade. Water
circulated through heat reservoirs in this temperature
range is able to extract enough heat to warm
residential, commercial, and industrial spaces. More
than 20,000 apartments in France are now heated by
warm underground water drawn from a heat reservoir
in a geologic structure near Paris called the Paris Basin.
Iceland sits on a volcanic structure known as the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Reykjavik, the capital of Iceland, is
entirely heated by geothermal energy derived from
volcanic heat.
3. According to paragraph 3, what is the connection
between underground faults and naturally occurring
steam?
A.Underground faults enable the heat from
molten-rock material to escape upward to regions
where it can heat surface water enough to produce
steam.
B.Underground faults are created by steam that is
produced in geothermal reservoirs deep inside Earth.
C.Underground faults create spaces in which natural
steam is sometimes trapped.
D.Underground faults allow surface water to reach
deep rocks that are hot enough to turn it into steam.
4. In paragraph 3, why does the author mention that
in the 1990s The Geysers was in its third decade of
production?
A.To provide the historical context of the geothermal
production of electricity in the United States
B.To imply that The Geysers was the first geothermal
site to be put into production in California
C.To help explain the signs of decline shown by The
Geysers
D.To explain why 70 new geothermal sites were put
into electricity production in the late 1990s
Paragraph3: Geothermal reservoirs with temperatures
above 180°centigrade are useful for generating
electricity. They occur primarily in regions of recent
volcanic activity as hot, dry rock; natural hot water; or
natural steam. The latter two sources are limited to
those few areas where surface water seeps down
through underground faults or fractures to reach deep
rocks heated by the recent activity of molten rock
material. The world's largest supply of natural steam
occurs at The Geysers, 120 kilometers north of San
Francisco, California. In the 1990s enough electricity to
meet about half the needs of San Francisco was being
generated there. This facility was then in its third
decade of production and was beginning to show signs
of decline, perhaps because of over development. By
the late 1990s some 70 geothermal
electric-generating plants were in operation in
California, Utah, Nevada, and Hawaii, generating
enough power to supply about a million people.
Eighteen countries now generate electricity using
geothermal heat.
5.According to paragraph 4, extracting heat from very
hot, dry rocks is difficult in part because
A.the underground rock must be fractured before heat
can be removed from it
B.the water above the rock is under very high pressure
C.the rock breaks apart when water is pumped into it
D.the water circulated through the rock must be much
cooler than the rock itself6.How is the problem that the surface may sink
related to the problem that water heated
geothermally may contain toxic materials ?
A.Both problems could be solved by returning
groundwater that is removed from an underground
heat reservoir back to the reservoir after heat is
extracted from it.
B.The problem of sinking is more difficult to solve than
is the problem of toxic materials.
C.Land at the surface sinks because the rock beneath
the surface is weakened when salts and toxic
materials are removed from it in the process of
extracting geothermal energy.
D.Both problems are caused by the fact that the hot
groundwater in a heat reservoir dissolves the rock,
which weakens the rock and makes the water toxic
with salt.
Paragrph4: Extracting heat from very hot, dry rocks
presents a more difficult problem: the rocks must be
fractured to permit the circulation of water, and the
water must be provided artificially. The rocks are
fractured by water pumped down at very high
pressures. Experiments are under way to developtechnologies for exploiting this resource.
Paragraph5: Like most other energy sources,
geothermal energy presents some environmental
problems. The surface of the ground can sink if hot
groundwater is withdrawn without being replaced. In
addition, water heated geothermally can contain saltsandtoxic materials dissolved from the hot rock. These
waters present a disposal problem if they are not
returned to the ground from which they were
removed.
7.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Heat flows through solid rock very slowly, so it takes
a very long time for geological processes to produce a
reservoir of geothermal energy.
B.Geothermal energy is not renewable because heat
flows very slowly through solid rock into or out of a
heat reservoir.
C.The heat quickly removed from a heat reservoir is
replaced so slowly by geological processes that
geothermal energy is not practically speaking,
renewable.
D.In most cases, heat travels into a heat reservoir so
slowfy that it is a much quicker process to remove the
heat from a reservoir than to replace it.
8.In paragraph 6, the author implies that in California,
Hawaii, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico, and the rift
valleys of Africa the potential size of the geothermal
resource is so large that
A.it might be economically worth developing these
sites even though geothermal energy is not renewable
B.these sites will be the first geothermal energy sites
to be developed with new technology
C.these sites are likely to make a large-scale
contribution to the world energy budget in the
twenty-first century
D.it does not matter whether they have naturally
occurring deposits of hot water or steam
Paragraph6: The contribution of geothermal energy to
the world's energy future is difficult to estimate.
Geothermal energy is in a sense not renewable,
because in most cases the heat would be drawn out of
a reservoir much more rapidly than it would be
replaced by the very slow geological processes by
which heat flows through solid rock into a heat
reservoir. However, in many places (for example,
California, Hawaii, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico, the
rift valleys of Africa)the resource is potentially so large
that its future will depend on the economics of
production. At present, we can make efficient use of
only naturally occurring hot water or steam deposits.
Although the potential is enormous, it is likely that in
the near future geothermal energy can make
important local contributions only where the resource
is close to the user and the economics are favorable,
as they are in California, New Zealand, and Iceland.
Geothermal energy probably will not make large-scale
contributions to the world energy budget until well
into the twenty-first century, if ever.
293Earth's internal heat, fueled by radioactivity, provides the energy for plate tectonics and continental drift,
mountain building, and earthquakes. It can also be harnessed to drive electric generators and heat homes.
Geothermal energy becomes available in a practical form when underground heat is transferred by water that is
heated as it passes through a subsurface region of hot rocks (a heat reservoir) that may be hundreds or thousands
of feet deep. The water is usually naturally occurring groundwater that seeps down along fractures in the rock;
less typically, the water is artificially introduced by being pumped down from the surface. The water is brought
to the surface, as a liquid or steam, through holes drilled for the purpose. 
By far the most abundant form of geothermal energy occurs at the relatively low temperatures of 80°to
180°centigrade. Water circulated through heat reservoirs in this temperature range is able to extract enough
heat to warm residential, commercial, and industrial spaces. More than 20,000 apartments in France are now
heated by warm underground water drawn from a heat reservoir in a geologic structure near Paris called the Paris
Basin. Iceland sits on a volcanic structure known as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Reykjavik, the capital of Iceland, is
entirely heated by geothermal energy derived from volcanic heat.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
In either case, the heated water will usually be under considerable pressure, and so may have a
temperature that is well above its sea-level boiling point of 100°centigrade.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Heat reservoirs in the form of hot rock far beneath Earth's surface are a potential source of usable geothermal
energy.
○Heat reservoirs with a temperature from 80°to 180°centigrade can be used, as in France and Iceland, to
heat buildings.
○A number of countries now use geothermal reservoirs that contain water or steam above 180°centigrade to
generate electricity.
○Most heat reservoirs with a temperature above 180°centigrade cannot be used for energy because they are
usually too close to recent volcanic activity.
○The sinking of land above heat reservoirs and other environmental problems arise when water is pumped
into a heat reservoir under high pressure.
○Experiments are under way to determine if geothermally heated waters could be used as a source of certain
minerals that have been dissolved out of hot rocks deep within Earth.
○A number of issues, including how to extract heat from reservoirs that do not have a natural supply of water,
will significantly limit the use of geothermal energy for the foreseeable future.
TPO21-2 The Origins of Agriculture
1. According to paragraph 1, all of the following are
advantages of hunting and gathering over agriculture
EXCEPT:
A.It is a healthier lifestyle.
B.It requires less knowledge of plants and animals.
C.It does not need storage capabilities.
D.It is not tied to any specific location.
2. The word "therefore" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.in theory
B.obviously
C.frequently
D.as a result
3. Which of the following best describes the way
paragraph 2 is organized?
A.A possible explanation for a phenomenon is
presented and then criticized
B.Two similar ways of accounting for a puzzling fact are
considered.
C.Early societies' response to a problem is contrasted
with contemporary societies' response.
D.A prehistoric development is first explained in
traditional terms and then in contemporary terms.
Paragraph 1 ：How did it come about that farming
developed independently in a number of world
centers (the Southeast Asian mainland, Southwest
Asia, Central America, lowland and highland South
America, and equatorial Africa) at more or less the
same time? Agriculture developed slowly among
populations that had an extensive knowledge of plants
and animals. Changing from hunting and gathering to
agriculture had no immediate advantages. To start
with, it forced the population to abandon the nomad's
life and become sedentary, to develop methods of
storage and, often, systems of irrigation. Whilehunter-gatherers always had the option of moving
elsewhere when the resources were exhausted, this
became more difficult with farming. Furthermore, as
the archaeological record shows, the state of health of
agriculturalists was worse than that of their
contemporary hunter-gatherers.
Paragraph 2: Traditionally, it was believed that the
transition to agriculture was the result of a worldwide
population crisis. It was argued that once
hunter-gatherers had occupied the whole world, the
population started to grow everywhere and food
became scarce; agriculture would have been a
solution to this problem. We know, however, that
contemporary hunter-gatherer societies control their
population in a variety of ways. The idea of a worldpopulation crisis is therefore unlikely, although
population pressure might have arisen in some areas.
4. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The resources needed by the growing hunting and
gathering population increased rapidly once
temperatures rose.
B.Dramatic temperature increases and the
simultaneous growth of the hunting and gathering
population led to the need for more resources.
C.Higher temperatures led to the existence of
increased resources, thus enabling the hunting and
gathering population to grow.
D.The dramatic temperature increase occurred during
the few years when abundant resources allowed the
hunting and gathering population to grow.
5. According to paragraph 3, the abundance of
resources fluctuated sharply after the end of the
glacial period because
A.locally abundant resources were quickly exhausted
by hunter-gatherers
B.the temperature became much higher in some areas
over others
C.different types of plants and animals became
available as the climate changed
D.the amount of rainfall varied radically from one
period to the next
Paragraph 3: Climatic changes at the end of the glacial
period 13,000 years ago have been proposed to
account for the emergence of farming.
The
temperature increased dramatically in a short period
of time (years rather than centuries), allowing for a
growth of the hunting-gathering population due to the
abundance of resources. There were, however,
fluctuations in the climatic conditions, with the
consequences that wet conditions were followed by
dry ones, so that the availability of plants and animals
oscillated brusquely.
Paragraph 4: It would appear that the instability of the
climatic conditions led populations that had originally
been nomadic to settle down and develop a sedentary
style of life, which led in turn to population growth
and to the need to increase the amount of food
available. Farming originated in these conditions. Later
on, it became very difficult to change because of the
significant expansion of these populations. It could be
argued, however, that these conditions are notsufficient to explain the origins of agriculture .
Earth
had experienced previous periods of climatic change,
and yet agriculture had not been developed.
6.According to paragraph 5, Steven Mithen believes
that all of the following contributed to the emergence
of farming EXCEPT
A.the development of a mind flexible enough to come
up with solutions to complex problems
B.the tendency to use plants and animals to acquire
power
C.the tendency to emphasize the differences between
animals and people
D.the ability to make tools that could be used for the
large-scale harvesting of plants【Paragraph 5 】It is archaeologist Steven Mithen's
thesis, brilliantly developed in his book The Prehistory
of the Mind (1996), that approximately 40,000 years
ago the human mind developed cognitive fluidity, that
is, the integration of the specializations of the mind:
technical, natural history (geared to understanding the
behavior and distribution of natural resources), social
intelligence, and the linguistic capacity. Cognitive
fluidity explains the appearance of art, religion, and
sophisticated speech. Once humans possessed such amind, they were able to find an imaginative solution
to a situation of severe economic crisis such as the
farming dilemma described earlier. Mithen proposes
the existence of four mental elements to account for
the emergence of farming: (1) the ability to develop
tools that could be used intensively to harvest and
process plant resources; (2) the tendency to use plants
and animals as the medium to acquire social prestige
and power; (3) the tendency to develop "social
relationships" with animals structurally similar to
those developed with people—specifically, the ability
to think of animals as people (anthropomorphism)
and of people as animals (totemism); and (4) the
tendency to manipulate plants and animals.
7.The word "contention" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.investigation
B.improvement
C.debate
D.interpretation
8.According to paragraph 6, which of the following is a
weakness of Mithen's explanation?
A.It does not clearly distinguish agriculture from
pastoralism and horticulture.
B.It fails to explain why some societies adopted
agriculture while others did not.
C.It explains the domestication of plants and animals
but not the development of metal tools.
D.It overlooks the fact that illiteracy and low
productivity remain problems even today
Paragraph 6: The fact that some societies
domesticated animals and plants, discovered the use
of metal tools, became literate, and developed a state
should not make us forget that others developed
pastoralism or horticulture (vegetable gardening) but
remained illiterate and at low levels of productivity; a
few entered the modern period as hunting and
gathering societies. It is anthropologically important to
inquire into the conditions that made some societies
adopt agriculture while others remained
hunter-gatherers or horticulturalists. However, it
should be kept in mind that many societies that knew
of agriculture more or less consciously avoided it.
Whether Mithen's explanation is satisfactory is opentocontention, and some authors have recently
emphasized the importance of other factors.
How did it come about that farming developed independently in a number of world centers (the Southeast Asian
mainland, Southwest Asia, Central America, lowland and highland South America, and equatorial Africa) at more
or less the same time? Agriculture developed slowly among populations that had an extensive knowledge of
plants and animals. Changing from hunting and gathering to agriculture had no immediate advantages. To start
with, it forced the population to abandon the nomad's life and became sedentary, to develop methods of storage
and, often, systems of irrigation. While hunter-gatherers always had the option of moving elsewhere when the
resources were exhausted, this became more difficult with farming. Furthermore, as the archaeological record
shows, the state of health of agriculturalists was worse than that of their contemporary hunter-gatherers.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Because humans had built up this knowledge as hunter-gatherers, it is logical to conclude that over time they
would have become extremely efficient.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
It is unclear why hunter-gatherers in different parts of the world independently developed agriculture at roughly
the same time.
A.One obstacle to the transition from a nomadic lifestyle to the sedentary lifestyle required by agriculture was that
hunter-gatherers had not developed storage techniques.
B.It seems unlikely that agriculture emerged in response to a food shortage brought on by a worldwide population
crisis that developed once the whole world was occupied.
C.The origins of agriculture maybe linked to climate change at the end of the last ice age, but this does not explain
why earlier climatic instability had not led to agriculture.
D.The only available means of understanding the social organization and technical abilities of ancient
hunter-gatherer societies is the study of contemporary hunter-gatherers.
E.One recent theory suggests that the invention of agriculture was made possible by the integration of various
mental capacities in the human mind.
F.Little is known about why only some societies that adopted agriculture rapidly progressed to using metal tools,
becoming literate, and developing a state.
TPO21-3 Autobiographical Memory
1. According to paragraph 1, infantile amnesia has
intrigued psychologists because
A.the ability to recount memories prior to three years
of age seems to be connected to intelligence in
adulthood
B.psychologists do not understand why some people
are able to recount memories from before the age of
three years, while others are not able do so
C.psychologists do not understand the connection
between infantile amnesia and autobiographical
memory
D.although psychologists have evidence that infants
have memory abilities, most people cannot remember
life events that happened before the age of three
years
Paragraph 1 ：Think back to your childhood and try to
identify your earliest memory. How old were you?
Most people are not able to recount memories for
experiences prior to the age of three years, a
phenomenon called infantile amnesia. The question of
why infantile amnesia occurs has intriguedpsychologists for decades, especially in light of ample
evidence that infants and young children can display
impressive memory capabilities. Many find that
understanding the general nature of autobiographical
memory, that is, memory for events that have
occurred in one's own life, can provide some
important clues to this mystery. Between ages three
and four, children begin to give fairly lengthy and
cohesive descriptions of events in their past. What
factors are responsible for this developmental turning
point?
2. In paragraph 2, why does the author provide the
information that children with low verbal skills
showed evidence of remembering a past event?
A.To provide evidence that memories do not depend
only upon verbal skills
B.To challenge the idea that one year olds are too
young to form memories
C.To argue that the memory of one year olds depends
only on action-based codes
D.To suggest that Piaget later revised his findings on
the correlation between memory and verbal ability
3. The word "reasonable" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.consistent
B.sufficient
C.apparent
D.deep
4. The word "elaboration" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.development
B.specialization
C.use
D.transformation
5. According to paragraph 3, what is the relationship
between autobiographical memory and the
development of an understanding of the self?
A.Autobiographical memory aids in the development
of an understanding of the self.
B.Children possess an understanding of the self when
they can talk about past events in their lives.
C.The realization that the self continues through time
may aid in the onset of autobiographical memory.
D.The development of autobiographical memory helps
children gain an understanding of their roles in their
social relationships.
Paragraph 2 ：Perhaps the explanation goes back to
some ideas raised by influential Swiss psychologist
Jean Piaget—namely, that children under age two
years represent events in a qualitatively different form
than older children do. According to this line of
thought, the verbal abilities that blossom in the two
year old allow events to be coded in a form radically
different from the action-based codes of the infant.
Verbal abilities of one year olds are, in fact, related to
their memories for events one year later. When
researchers had one year olds imitate an action
sequence one year after they first saw it, there was
correlation between the children's verbal skills at the
time they first saw the event and their success on the
later memory task. However, even children with low
verbal skills showed evidence of remembering the
event; thus, memories may be facilitated by but are
not dependent on those verbal skills.
Paragraph 3 ：Another suggestion is that before
children can talk about past events in their lives, theyneed to have a reasonable understanding of the self
as a psychological entity. The development of an
understanding of the self becomes evident between
the first and second years of life and shows rapidelaboration in subsequent years. The realization that
the physical self has continuity in time, according to
this hypothesis, lays the foundation for the emergence
of autobiographical memory.
6. All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 4 as
ways in which parents help their children understand
the structure of narratives EXCEPT
A.talking with their children about past events
B.telling stories to their children
C.having their children repeat stories back to them
D.showing their children that they think memories are
important
Paragraph 4 ：A third possibility is that children will
not be able to tell their own "life story" until they
understand something about the general form stories
take, that is, the structure of narratives. Knowledge
about narratives arises from social interactions,
particularly the storytelling that children experience
from parents and the attempts parents make to talk
with children about past events in their lives. When
parents talk with children about "what we did today"
or "last week" or "last year," they guide the children's
formation of a framework for talking about the past.
They also provide children with reminders about the
memory and relay the message that memories are
valued as part of the cultural experience. It is
interesting to note that some studies show Caucasian
American children have earlier childhood memories
than Korean children do. Furthermore, other studies
show that Caucasian American mother-child pairs talk
about past events three times more often than do
Korean mother-child pairs. Thus, the types of social
experiences children have do factor into the
development of autobiographical memories.
Paragraph 5 ：A final suggestion is that children must
begin to develop a "theory of mind"—an awareness of
the concept of mental states (feelings, desires, beliefs,
and thoughts), their own and those of others—before
they can talk about their own past memories. Once
children become capable of answering such questions
as "What does it mean to remember?" and "What
does it mean to know something?" improvements in
memory seem to occur.
7. The organization of the passage can best be
described as
A.the presentation of an argument followed by the
evidence for and against it
B.a description of a phenomenon followed by several
possible theories about how it develops
C.the definition of a psychological term followed by a
history of its usage
D.an explanation of a process followed by a discussion
of its practical applications
8. The passage supports which of the following
statements about the development of
autobiographical memory?
A.It is unlikely that a single factor is responsible for the
development of autobiographical memory.
B.Jean Piaget was the first psychologist to understand
the development of autobiographical memory.
C.Understanding the development of autobiographical
memory will help psychologists eliminate infant
amnesia
D.Understanding what it means to remember is the
most important factor in the development of
autobiographical memory.
Paragraph 6 ：It may be that the developments just
described are intertwined with and influence one
another. Talking with parents about the past may
enhance the development of the self-concept, for
example, as well as help the child understand what it
means to "remember." No doubt the ability to talk
about one's past represents memory of a different
level of complexity than simple recognition or recall.
Think back to your childhood and try to identify your earliest memory. How old were you? Most people are not
able to recount memories for experiences prior to the age of three years, a phenomenon called infantile amnesia.
The question of why infantile amnesia occurs has intrigued psychologists for decades, especially in light of
ample evidence that infants and young children can display impressive memory capabilities. Many find that
understanding the general nature of autobiographical memory, that is, memory for events that have occurred in
one's own life, can provide some important clues to this mystery. Between ages three and four, children begin
to give fairly lengthy and cohesive descriptions of events in their past. What factors are responsible for this
developmental turning point?
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
It is unlikely that this memory will be from the first two years of life.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage. A
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
The ability to construct autobiographical memories—coherent narratives about events from one's past—is
probably the joint product of several social and intellectual developments.
A.Although children are capable of simple recognition and recall very early in life, they do not develop the capacity
for autobiographical memory until the age of three or four years.
B.Verbal skills and familiarity with narrative structures probably aid in the construction of autobiographical
memories.
C.Children's earliest autobiographical memories are usually about social interactions with parents.
D.Research suggests that infantile amnesia occurs in some cultures but not in others and may be linked to
children's social experiences.
E.The development of autobiographical memory allows children to appreciate the fact that memories are an
important part of their cultural experience.
F.Children who have acquired a concept of the self and of various mental states are generally able to talk about
their own past memories.
TPO22
TPO22-1 Spartina
1. According to paragraph 1, each of the following is
true of Spartina alrerniflora EXCEPT
A.It rarely flowers in salt marshes.
B.It grows well in intertidal zones.
C.It is commonly referred to as cordgrass.
D.It occurs naturally along the Gulf Coast and the
Atlantic coast of the United States.
2. According to paragraph 2, a major reason why
natural salt marshes are so productive is that they are
A.inhabited by long-lived seaweed and marsh grasses
that reproduce gradually
B.kept clear of excess plant material by the tides
C.regularly supplied with high levels of nutrients
D.home to a wide variety of different species of
grasses
Paragraph 1: Spartina alterniflora, known as cordgrass,
is a deciduous, perennial flowering plant native to the
Atlantic coast and the Gulf Coast of the United States.
It is the dominant native species of the lower salt
marshes along these coasts, where it grows in the
intertidal zone (the area covered by water some parts
of the day and exposed others).
Paragraph 2: These natural salt marshes are among
the most productive habitats in the marine
environment. Nutrient-rich water is brought to the
wetlands during each high tide, making a high rate of
food production possible. As the seaweed and marsh
grass leaves die, bacteria break down the plant
material, and insects, small shrimplike organisms,
fiddler crabs, and marsh snails eat the decaying plant
tissue, digest it, and excrete wastes high in nutrients.
Numerous insects occupy the marsh, feeding on living
or dead cordgrass tissue, and redwing blackbirds,
sparrows, rodents, rabbits, and deer feed directly on
the cordgrass.
Each tidal cycle carries plant material
into the offshore water to be used by the subtidal
organisms.
3.The word "exceedingly" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.unusually
B.dangerously
C.surprisingly
D.highly
4. According to paragraph 3, one reason that Spartina
is able to compete in marsh environments so
successfully is its ability to
A.alter the substrate in which it grows
B.convert sulfides into a usable form of sulfur
C.grow and produce seeds while floating on the
surface of the water
D.produce carbon dioxide with great efficiency
Paragraph 3: Spartina is an exceedingly competitive
plant. It spreads primarily by underground stems;
colonies form when pieces of the root system or
whole plants float into an area and take root or when
seeds float into a suitable area and germinate.
Spartina establishes itself on substrates ranging from
sand and silt to gravel and cobble and is tolerant of
salinities ranging from that of near freshwater (0.05
percent) to that of salt water (3.5 percent). Because
they lack oxygen, marsh sediments are high in sulfides
that are toxic to most plants. Spartina has the ability
to take up sulfides and convert them to sulfate, a form
of sulfur that the plant can use; this ability makes it
easier for the grass to colonize marsh environments.
Another adaptive advantage is Spartina's ability to use
carbon dioxide more efficiently than most other
plants.
5. Paragraph 4 suggests that where Spartina occurs
naturally, an established stand of it will eventually
A.create conditions in which it can no longer survive
B.get washed away by water flowing through the
deep channels that form around it
C.become adapted to brackish water
D.take over other grass species growing in the area
6. According to paragraph 4, in its natural habitats,
Spartina helps estuaries by
A.controlling marshland decline
B.decreasing the substrate elevation
C.reducing the brackishness of the water
D.increasing the flow of water into the estuary
7. According to paragraph 5, Spartina negatively
affects wildlife in estuaries by
A.trapping fish and waterfowl in sediment
B.preventing oysters from transplanting
successfully
C.turning mudflats into high marshes and salt
meadows
D.expanding the marshy fringes of salt meadows
Paragraph 4: These characteristics make Spartina a
valuable component of the estuaries where it occurs
naturally. The plant functions as a stabilizer and a
sediment trap and as a nursery area for estuarine fish
and shellfish. Once established, a stand of Spartina
begins to trap sediment, changing the substrate
elevation, and eventually the stand evolves into a high
marsh system where Spartina is gradually displaced by
higher-elevation, brackish-water species. As elevation
increases, narrow, deep channels of water form
throughout the marsh. Along the east coast Spartina is
considered valuable for its ability to prevent erosion
and marshland deterioration; it is also used for coastal
restoration projects and the creation of new wetland
sites.
Paragraph 5: Spartina was transported to Washington
State in packing materials for oysters transplanted
from the east coast in 1894. Leaving its insect
predators behind, the cordgrass has been spreading
slowly and steadily along Washington's tidal estuaries
on the west coast, crowding out the native plants and
drastically altering the landscape by trapping sediment.
Spartina modifies tidal mudflats, turning them into
high marshes inhospitable to the many fish and
waterfowl that depend on the mudflats. It is already
hampering the oyster harvest and the Dungeness crab
fishery, and it interferes with the recreational use of
beaches and waterfronts. Spartina has been
transplanted to England and to New Zealand for land
reclamation and shoreline stabilization. In New
Zealand the plant has spread rapidly, changing
mudflats with marshy fringes to extensive salt
meadows and reducing the number and kinds of birds
and animals that use the marsh.
8. According to paragraph 6, each of the following
methods has been used in attempts to control
Spartina EXCEPT
A.flooding plants
B.cutting plants down repeatedly
C.applying herbicides
D.introducing predatory insects
Paragraph 6: Efforts to control Spartina outside its
natural environment have included burning, flooding,
shading plants with black canvas or plastic,
smothering the plants with dredged materials or clay,
applying herbicide, and mowing repeatedly. Little
success has been reported in New Zealand and
England; Washington State's management program
has tried many of these methods and is presently
using the herbicide glyphosphate to control its spread.
Work has begun to determine the feasibility of using
insects as biological controls, but effective biological
controls are considered years away. Even with a
massive effort, it is doubtful that complete eradication
of Spartina from nonnative habitats is possible, for it
has become an integral part of these shorelines and
estuaries during the last 100 to 200 years.
Spartina is an exceedingly competitive plant. It spreads primarily by underground stems; colonies form
when pieces of the root system or whole plants float into an area and take root or when seeds float into a
suitable area and germinate. Spartina establishes itself on substrates ranging from sand and silt to gravel and
cobble and is tolerant of salinities ranging from that of near freshwater (0.05 percent) to that of salt water (3.5
percent). Because they lack oxygen, marsh sediments are high in sulfides that are toxic to most plants. 
Spartina has the ability to take up sulfides and convert them to sulfate, a form of sulfur that the plant can use; this
ability makes it easier for the grass to colonize marsh environments. Another adaptive advantage is Spartina's
ability to use carbon dioxide more efficiently than most other plants.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Spartina is particularly able to tolerate high salinities because salt glands on the surface of the leaves
remove the salt from the plant sap.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Spartina alrerniflora, or cordgrass, is the dominant native species in salt marshes along the Atlantic coast
and the Gulf Coast of the United States.
A.Spartina is very well adapted to conditions in salt marshes, where it plays a valuable role in stabilizing them
and making them highly productive marine habitats.
B.Spartina expands by growing root systems that float on the water's surface and descend underground,
where it finds the nutrients that it needs to germinate.
C.As a result of its spread in Washington State over the past hundred years,Spartina has now become a threat
to native oysters by releasing sediments that contain sulfides into the waters.
D.The dead leaves of Spartina become food for a wide variety of marine organisms.
E.Outside its native regions, Spartina can pose serious problems by turning mudflats into high marshes that
are inhospitable to many native fish and birds.
F.Spartina has physiological adaptations that allow it to grow in environments where other plants cannot,
making it a very strong competitor that is difficult to control once it is established
TPO22-2 The Birth of Photography
1. According to paragraphs 2 and 3 which of the
following did the daguerreotype and the calotype
have in common?
A.They were equally useful for artists.
B.They could be reproduced.
C.They produced a permanent image
D.They were produced on treated paper.
2. The word "duplicated " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.copied
B.replaced
C.handled
D.clarified
Paragraph 1: Perceptions of the visible world were
greatly altered by the invention of photography in the
middle of the nineteenth century. In particular, and
quite logically, the art of painting was forever changed,
though not always in the ways one might have
expected. The realistic and naturalistic painters of the
mid- and late-nineteenth century were all intently
aware of photography—as a thing to use, to learn
from, and react to.
Paragraph 2: Unlike most major inventions,
photography had been long and impatiently awaited.
The images produced by the camera obscura, a boxlike
device that used a pinhole or lens to throw an image
onto a ground-glass screen or a piece of white paper,
were already familiar—the device had been much
employed by topographical artists like the Italian
painter Canaletto in his detailed views of the city of
Venice. What was lacking was a way of giving such
images permanent form. This was finally achieved by
Louis Daguerre (1787-1851), who perfected a way of
fixing them on a silvered copper plate. His discovery,
the "daguerreotype," was announced in 1839.
Paragraph 3: A second and very different process was
patented by the British inventor William Henry Talbot
(1800-1877) in 1841. Talbot's "calotype" was the first
negative-to-positive process and the direct ancestor of
the modern photograph. The calotype was
revolutionary in its use of chemically treated paper in
which areas hit by light became dark in tone,
producing a negative image. This "negative," as Talbot
called it, could then be used to print multiple positive
images on another piece of treated paper.
Paragraph 4 : The two processes produced very
different results. The daguerreotype was a unique
image that reproduced what was in front of the
camera lens in minute, unselective detail and couldnot be duplicated . The calotype could be made in
3. The word "authenticity " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.improvement
B.practicality
C.genuineness
D.repetition
4. What point does the author make in paragraph 6?
A.Paintings became less expensive because of
competition with photography.
B.Photography, unlike painting, was a type of
portraiture that even ordinary people could afford.
C.Every style of painting was influenced by the
invention of photography.
D.The daguerreotype was more popular than the
calotype.
5. The word "reluctant " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.unable
B.embarrassed
C.unlikely
D.unwilling
Paragraph 5: One of the things that most impressed
the original audience for photography was the idea of
authenticity . Nature now seemed able to speak for
itself, with a minimum of interference. The title Talbot
chose for his book, The Pencil of Nature (the first part
of which was published in 1844), reflected this feeling.
Artists were fascinated by photography because it
offered a way of examining the world in much greater
detail. They were also afraid of it, because it seemed
likely to make their own efforts unnecessary.
Paragraph 6: Photography did indeed make certain
kinds of painting obsolete—the daguerreotype
virtually did away with the portrait miniature. It also
made the whole business of making and owning
images democratic. Portraiture, once a luxury for the
privileged few, was suddenly well within the reach of
many more people.
Paragraph 7: In the long term, photography's impact
on the visual arts was far from simple. Because the
medium was so prolific, in the sense that it was
possible to produce a multitude of images very
cheaply, it was soon treated as the poor relation of
fine art, rather than its destined successor. Even those
artists who were most dependent on photographybecame reluctant to admit that they made use of it, in
case this compromised their professional standing.
6. The word "unanticipated " in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.indirect
B.not expected
C.unquestionable
D.beneficial7. The word "accidental " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.surprising
B.unintentional
C.realistic
D.unusual
8. Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 8
as a benefit that artists derived from photography?
A.It inspired artists to use technological themes in
their painting.
B.It lent prestige to those artists who used
photographs as models for paintings
C.It provided artists with new types of equipment
to speed up the painting process.
D.It motivated artists to think about new ways to
compose images in their paintings.
Paragraph 8: The rapid technical development of
photography—the introduction of lighter and simpler
equipment, and of new emulsions that coated
photographic plates, film, and paper and enabled
images to be made at much faster speeds—had someunanticipated consequences. Scientific experiments
made by photographers such as Eadweard Muybridge
(1830-1904) and Etienne-Jules Marey (1830-1904)
demonstrated that the movements of both humans
and animals differed widely from the way they had
been traditionally represented in art. Artists, often
reluctantly, were forced to accept the evidence
provided by the camera. The new candid
photography—unposed pictures that were made
when the subjects were unaware that their pictures
were being taken—confirmed these scientific results,
and at the same time, thanks to the radical cropping
(trimming) of images that the camera often imposed,suggested new compositional formats. The accidental
effects obtained by candid photographers were soon
being copied by artists such as the French painter
Degas.
312Unlike most major inventions, photography had been long and impatiently awaited. The images produced by
the camera obscura, a boxlike device that used a pinhole or lens to throw an image onto a ground-glass screen or
a piece of white paper, were already familiar—the device had been much employed by topographical artists like
the Italian painter Canaletto in his detailed views of the city of Venice. What was lacking was a way of giving such
images permanent form. This was finally achieved by Louis Daguerre (1787-1851), who perfected a way of fixing
them on a silvered copper plate. His discovery, the "daguerreotype," was announced in 1839. 
A.second and very different process was patented by the British inventor William Henry Talbot (1800-1877) in
1. Talbot's "calotype" was the first negative-to-positive process and the direct ancestor of the modern
photograph. The calotype was revolutionary in its use of chemically treated paper in which areas hit by light
became dark in tone, producing a negative image. This "negative," as Talbot called it, could then be used to print
multiple positive images on another piece of treated paper. 
9. Look at the four squares HI that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [] to add the sentence to the passage.
Although his process produced permanent images, each was unique and no reproduction of the picture was
possible.
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage This question is worth 2 points.
The invention of photography had a significant impact on the art of painting in the nineteenth century.
A.For a brief time, artists preferred not to paint natural or realistic images that would have to compete with
photographs.
B.Before photography, Canaletto had used the camera obscura to project scenes onto a paper or glass plate.
C.The photographic processes of Louis Daguerre and William Henry Talbot both made permanent images, but
only Talbot's process allowed making multiple copies.
D.The work of Eadweard Muybridge and Etienne-Jules Marey established photography both as a science and as
an art.
E.Photography made accurate images widely and inexpensively available, but this popular success also had the
effect of lowering its perceived value in relation to the fine arts.
F.Photography eliminated the painted portrait miniature, led artists to accurately represent movement, and
affected pictorial composition, but did not replace traditional visual arts.
TPO22-3 The Allende Meteorite
1. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 1 about the large meteor that entered
Earths atmosphere on February 8, 1969?
A.It was almost ten miles wide.
B.It was the biggest meteor ever to hit Mexico.
C.It weighed more than two tons.
D.It broke into more pieces than most meteors do.
2. Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Allende meteorites were formed when
constituents of the interstellar cloud of gas and dust
got trapped inside small, roughly spherical objects and
these objects became bound together in a dark gray
matrix.
B.Inside Allende meteorites is a dark gray matrix
that binds together small spherical or irregular objects
formed from the interstellar cloud of gas and dust out
of which the solar system was made.
C.By breaking open Allende meteorites, scientists
were able to find out what the solar nebula was made
of.
D.Allende meteorites were filled with material
formed almost entirelyfrom interstellar gas and dust.
3. The word "allusion" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.addition
B.modification
C.resemblance
D.reference
Paragraph 1: Sometime after midnight on February
8,1969, a large, bright meteor entered Earth's
atmosphere and broke into thousands of pieces,
plummeted to the ground, and scattered over an area
50 miles long and 10 miles wide in the state of
Chihuahua in Mexico. The first meteorite from this fall
was found in the village of Pueblito de Allende.
Altogether, roughly two tons of meteorite fragments
were recovered, all of which bear the name Allende
for the location of the first discovery.
Paragraph 2: Individual specimens of Allende are
covered with a black, glassy crust that formed when
their exteriors melted as they were slowed by Earth's
atmosphere. When broken open, Allende stones are
revealed to contain an assortment of small, distinctive
objects, spherical or irregular in shape and embedded
in a dark gray matrix (binding material), which were
once constituents of the solar nebula—the interstellar
cloud of gas and dust out of which our solar system
was formed.
Paragraph 3: The Allende meteorite is classified as a
chondrite. Chondrites take their name from the Greek
word chondros—meaning "seed"—an allusion to their
appearance as rocks containing tiny seeds. These
seeds are actually chondrules: millimeter-sized melted
droplets of silicate material that were cooled into
spheres of glass and crystal. A few chondrules contain
4. According to paragraph 3, what does the presence
of grains inside some of the chondrules indicate?
A.The chondrules were formed of silicate material.
B.The chondrules were formed at high temperatures
and then cooled rapidly.
C.The grains were formed in huge areas of the solar
nebula
D.The grains were formed after the chondrules were
fused together into chondrites.
5.The word "pristine" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.pure
B.solid
C.ordinary
D.trappedgrains that survived the melting event, so these
enigmatic chondrules must have formed when
compact masses of nebular dust were fused at high
temperatures—approaching 1,700 degrees
Celsius—and then cooled before these surviving grains
could melt. Study of the textures of chondrules
confirms that they cooled rather quickly, in times
measured in minutes or hours, so the heating events
that formed them must have been localized. It seems
very unlikely that large portions of the nebula were
heated to such extreme temperatures, and huge
nebula areas could not possibly have lost heat so fast.
Chondrules must have been melted in small pockets of
the nebula that were able to lose heat rapidly. The
origin of these peculiar glassy spheres remains an
enigma.
Paragraph 4: Equally perplexing constituents of
Allende are the refractory inclusions: irregular white
masses that tend to be larger than chondrules. They
are composed of minerals uncommon on Earth, all
rich in calcium, aluminum, and titanium, the most
refractory (resistant to melting) of the major elements
in the nebula. The same minerals that occur in
refractory inclusions are believed to be the
earliest-formed substances to have condensed out of
the solar nebula. However, studies of the textures of
inclusions reveal that the order in which the minerals
appeared in the inclusions varies from inclusion to
inclusion, and often does not match the theoretical
condensation sequence for those metals.
Paragraph 5: Chondrules and inclusions in Allende are
held together by the chondrite matrix, a mixture of
fine-grained, mostly silicate minerals that also includes
grains of iron metal and iron sulfide. At one time it
was thought that these matrix grains might be pristine
nebular dust, the sort of stuff from which chondrules
and inclusions were made. However, detailed studies
of the chondrite matrix suggest that much of it, too,
has been formed by condensation or melting in the
nebula, although minute amounts of surviving
interstellar dust are mixed with the processed
materials.
6.According to paragraph 5, which of the following is
indicated by studies of the mixture holding the
inclusions together?
A.Large amounts of this material were formed by
condensation or melting in the nebula.
B.This material
contains more iron and iron sulfide than had
previously been thought.
C.This material is very similar
to the material from which the refractory inclusions
are made
D.The grains in this material are made from
the same elements as chondrules are.
7. According to paragraph 6, the composition of
chondritic meteorites differs from the composition of
the Sun primarily in
A.containing nebular matter
B.containing many fewer atoms of iron
C.the relative amount of volatile elements
D.the ratio of iron to silicon
8. According to paragraph 6, what is the significance of
the similarity in composition between chondrites and
the Sun?
A.It indicates what the matter from which planets
were formed was probably like.
B.It may explain howthe Sun originally developed.
C.It helps scientists estimate the variations in the
chemical composition of different meteors.
D.It suggests that most meteorites may contain
large quantities of volatile elements.
Chondrules and inclusions in Allende are held
together by the chondrite matrix, a mixture of
fine-grained, mostly silicate minerals that also
includes grains of iron metal and iron sulfide. At one
time it was thought that these matrix grains might be
pristine nebular dust, the sort of stuff from which
chondrules and inclusions were made. However,
detailed studies of the chondrite matrix suggest that
much of it, too, has been formed by condensation or
melting in the nebula, although minute amounts of
surviving interstellar dust are mixed with the
processed materials.
Paragraph 6: All these diverse constituents are
aggregated together to form chondritic meteorites,
like Allende, that have chemical compositions much
like that of the Sun. To compare the compositions of a
meteorite and the Sun, it is necessary that we use
ratios of elements rather than simply the abundancesof atoms. After all ,the Sun has many more atoms of
any element, say iron, than does a meteorite
specimen, but the ratios of iron to silicon in the two
kinds of matter might be comparable. The
compositional similarity is striking. The major
difference is that Allende is depleted in the most
volatile elements, like hydrogen, carbon, oxygen,
nitrogen, and the noble gases, relative to the Sun.
These are the elements that tend to form gases even
at very low temperatures. We might think of
chondrites as samples of distilled Sun, a sort of solar
sludge from which only gases have been removed.
Since practically all the solar system's mass resides in
the Sun, this similarity in chemistry means that
chondrites have average solar system composition,
except for the most volatile elements; they are truly
lumps of nebular matter, probably similar in
composition to the matter from which planets were
assembled.
316Equally perplexing constituents of Allende are the refractory inclusions: irregular white masses that tend to be
larger than chondrules. They are composed of minerals uncommon on Earth, all rich in calcium, aluminum, and
titanium, the most refractory (resistant to melting) of the major elements in the nebula. The same minerals
that occur in refractory inclusions are believed to be the earliest-formed substances to have condensed out of the
solar nebula.  However, studies of the textures of inclusions reveal that the order in which the minerals
appeared in the inclusions varies from inclusion to inclusion, and often does not match the theoretical
condensation sequence for those metals. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage
It is therefore still unclear if all inclusions were formed in the same way.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Studies of the Allende meteorite provided information about the composition of chondritic meteorites and
their possible origin.
A.When Allende entered Earth's atmosphere, it broke into thousands of pieces called chondrites because
they look like glassy, black seeds.
B.The mineral content of chondrules suggests that they were probably formed in isolated regions of the
nebula that remained much hotter than the rest.
C.Chondrules are tiny, millimeter-sized drops of silicate materials that probably formed when lumps of
nebular dust were fused at extremely high temperatures and then quickly cooled.
D.Irregularly shaped inclusions in Allende are composed of minerals that are resistant to melting and are
believed to be the earlest minerals to have condensed out of the nebula.
E.The matrix that holds the chondrules and inclusions together in Allende consists mainly of grains of nebular
dust that were trapped inside the meteor before they could be melted.
F.Except for being depleted in volatile elements, chondritic meteorites are probably very similar in
composition to the matter from which planets were assembled.
TPO23
TPO23-1 Urban Climates
1. According to paragraph 2, how soon heat from a
warmed house reaches the outside air is greatly
affected by
A.how well the house is heated
B.how well the house is insulated
C.how many adults live in the house
D.how much sunshine the house receives
Paragraph 1: The city is an extraordinary processor of
mass and energy and has its own metabolism. A daily
input of water, food, and energy of various kinds is
matched by an output of sewage, solid waste, air
pollutants, energy, and materials that have been
transformed in some way. The quantities involved areenormous . Many aspects of this energy use affect the
atmosphere of a city, particularly in the production of
heat.
Paragraph 2: In winter the heat produced by a city can
equal or surpass the amount of heat available from
the Sun. All the heat that warms a building eventually
transfers to the surrounding air, a process that is
quickest where houses are poorly insulated. But an
automobile produces enough heat to warm an
average house in winter, and if a house were perfectly
insulated, one adult could also produce more than
enough heat to warm it. Therefore, even without any
industrial production of heat, an urban area tends to
be warmer than the countryside that surrounds it.
2. According to paragraph 3, each of the following
contributes to making urban areas warmer than the
surrounding countryside EXCEPT
A.the fuel burned by motor vehicles
B.the capacity to store heat of the materials used in
building a city
C.the easy flow of heat into the ground in city areas
covered by vegetation
D.the repeated reflection of solar radiation back and
forth among buildings
3. According to paragraph 3, why do materials in the
countryside have a lower heat capacity than materials
in cities do?
A.The countryside in the Sun is the only important
source of heat.
B.Construction materials in the city are not as
good at keeping buildings warm as they are in the
countryside.
C.In the countryside the solar heat that flows into
the ground flows out again quickly.
D.Countryside vegetation prevents heat from
being trapped in the ground.
Paragraph 3: The burning of fuel, such as by cars, is
not the only source of this increased heat. Two other
factors contribute to the higher overall temperature in
cities. The first is the heat capacity of the materials
that constitute the city, which is typically dominated
by concrete and asphalt. During the day, heat from the
Sun can be conducted into these materials and
stored—to be released at night. But in the countryside
materials have a significantly lower heat capacity
because a vegetative blanket prevents heat from
easily flowing into and out of the ground. The second
factor is that radiant heat coming into the city from
the Sun is trapped in two ways: (1) by a continuing
series of reflection among the numerous vertical
surfaces that buildings present and (2) by the dust
dome, the cloudlike layer of polluted air that most
cities produce. Shortwave radiation from the Sun
passes through the pollution dome more easily than
outgoing longwave radiation does; the latter is
absorbed by the gaseous pollutants of the dome and
reradiated back to the urban surface.
4. The word “configuration”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. location
B.history
C. temperature
○D.shape
5. According to paragraph 4, what can explain the
substantial differences in temperature between one
area and other within a well-developed heat island?
A. The overall size of the heat island that includes
the two reasons
B. The intensify of the heat island that includes the
two areas
C. Differences between the two areas in the general
level of activity, including traffic
D. Differences between the two areas in the
insulation materials used in construction
intensity. The actual level of intensity depends on such
factors as the physical layout, population density, and
productive activities of a metropolis.
6. Paragraph 4 supports the idea that a city's
heat-island intensity would increase if
A.the city went into an economic decline and lost
population
B.the city's economy shifted from heavy industry
to health care and education
C.there was an upward trend in the average age of
the city's residents
D.repair work on the streets slowed traffic
throughout the city
Paragraph 4: Cities, then, are warmer than the
surrounding rural areas, and together they produce a
phenomenon known as the urban heat island. Heat
islands develop best under particular conditions
associated with light winds, but they can form almostany time. The precise configuration of a heat island
depends on several factors. For example, the wind can
make a heat island stretch in the direction it blows.
When a heat island is well developed, variations can
be extreme; in winter, busy streets in cities can be
1.7℃warmer than the side streets. Areas near traffic
lights can be similarly warmer than the areas between
them because of the effect of cars standing in traffic
instead of moving. The maximum differences in
temperature between neighboring urban and rural
environments is called the heat-island intensity for
that region. In general, the larger the city, the greater
its heat-island
7. According to paragraph 5, surfaces in the city are
generally drier than surfaces in the countryside
between periods of rainfall because
A.in the city gentle rain is much more common
than heavy rain
B.high temperatures in the city speed up the
process of evaporation
C.in the city there are longer periods of dry
weather between episodes of rain
D.rainwater in the city cannot soak into most
surfaces and quickly runs off8. The word “modified ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.changed
B.blocked
C.increased
D.weakened
Paragraph 5: The surface-atmosphere relationships
inside metropolitan areas produce a number of
climatic peculiarities. For one thing, the presence or
absence of moisture is affected by the special qualities
of the urban surface. With much of the built-up
landscape impenetrable by water, even gentle rain
runs off almost immediately from rooftops, streets,
and parking lots. Thus, city surfaces, as well as the air
above them, tend to be drier between episodes of rain;
with little water available for the cooling process of
evaporation, relative humidities are usually lower.
Wind movements are also modified in cities because
buildings increase the friction on air flowing around
them. This friction tends to slow the speed of winds,
making them far less efficient at dispersing pollutants.
On the other hand, air turbulence increases because
of the effect of skyscrapers on airflow. Rainfall is also
increased in cities. The cause appears to be in part
greater turbulence in the urban atmosphere as hot air
rises from the built-up surface.
321Cities, then, are warmer than the surrounding rural areas, and together they produce a phenomenon known as
the urban heat island. Heat islands develop best under particular conditions associated with light winds, but they
can form almost any time. The precise configuration of a heat island depends on several factors. For example,
the wind can make a heat island stretch in the direction it blows. When a heat island is well developed,
variations can be extreme; in winter, busy streets in cities can be 1.7 ℃warmer than the side streets. Areas near
traffic lights can be similarly warmer than the areas between them because of the effect of cars standing in traffic
instead of moving.
The maximum differences in temperature between neighboring urban and rural environments is called the
heat-island intensity for that region. In general, the larger the city, the greater its heat-island intensity. The actual
level of intensity depends on such factors as the physical layout, population density, and productive activities of a
metropolis.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Another possibility is for the heat island to be stretched along the course of major rivers, since large
waterways typically have a warming effect on the air directly above them.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Cities create climatic conditions of their own through their physical structure and urban activities.
A.The amount of heat produced in a city will be reduced when cities use the heat from cars to warm homes.
B.The built-up landscape of the city readily becomes a heat island, with greater water runoff and special
climatic conditions such as low relative humidity and increased air turbulence.
C.The materials from which cities are built and the effects of pollution domes help make urban areas warmer
than rural areas.
D.Cities tend to be warmer than their surrounding areas, in part because they produce heat by burning fuel
for heating, powering vehicles, and industrial production.
E.In most cities, the heating that results from solar radiation is intensified by carbon dioxide, a gas that is
present at very high concentrations in cities'atmospheres.
F.During periods without rainfall, the air in cities heats up and causes winds to slow down, with the result that
pollutants are not dispersed.
TPO23-2 Seventeenth-Century Dutch Agriculture
1. By indicating that production was in line with
market demands the author means that Dutch
farmers were able to
A.exceed other European countries in agricultural
production
B.produce crops mat were similar to those
popular in other European countries
C.supply sufficient quantities of the agricultural
products that the Dutch population wanted to buy
D.satisfy the demand for high quality agricultural
products from the Baltic region
2. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Buying imported grain led to the Dutch
demanding that other foodstuffs and consumer goods
be imported.
B.Because the Dutch were able to import
inexpensive grain, they had money available to create
a demand for other food products and consumer
goods.
C.Keeping the price of grain low was a primary
goal of the Dutch at a time when they could not
produce enough grain to provide for all their needs.
D.The demand for other foodstuffs and consumer
goods forced the Dutch to import grain and other
products at a time when maintaining low prices was
especially important.
Paragraph 1: Agriculture and fishing formed the
primary sector of the economy in the Netherlands in
the seventeenth century. Dutch agriculture was
modernized and commercialized new crops and
agricultural techniques raised levels of production so
that they were in line with market demands, and
cheap grain was imported annually from the Baltic
region in large quantities. According to estimates,
about 120,000 tons of imported grain fed about
600,000 people: that is about a third of the Dutchpopulation. Importing the grain, which would have
been expensive and time consuming for the Dutch to
have produced themselves, kept the price of grain low
and thus stimulated individual demand for other
foodstuffs and consumer goods.
Paragraph 2: Apart from this, being able to give up
labor-intensive grain production freed both the land
and the workforce for more productive agricultural
divisions. The peasants specialized in livestock
husbandry and dairy farming as well as in cultivating
industrial crops and fodder crops: flax, madder, and
rape were grown, as were tobacco, hops, and turnips.
3. According to paragraph 2, the increases demands
on Dutch agriculture made by urban consumers had
which of the following results?
A.Seasonal shortages of the products consumers most
wanted
B.Increased production of high-quality grain products
C.Raised prices charged by peasants to urban
consumers
D.Different ways of caring for dairy-producing animals4. The word “consumption ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.sale
B.storage
C.exportation
D.utilization
These products were bought mostly by urban
businesses. There was also a demand among urban
consumers for dairy products such as butter and
cheese, which, in the sixteenth century, had become
more expensive than grain. The high prices
encouraged the peasants to improve their animal
husbandry techniques; for example, they began
feeding their animals indoors in order to raise the milk
yield of their cows.
Paragraph 3: In addition to dairy farming and
cultivating industrial crops, a third sector of the Dutch
economy reflected the way in which agriculture was
being modernized-horticulture. In the sixteenth
century, fruit and vegetables were to be found only in
gardens belonging to wealthy people. This changed in
the early part of the seventeenth century when
horticulture became accepted as an agricultural sector.
Whole villages began to cultivate fruit and vegetables.
The produce was then transported by water tomarkets in the cities, where the consumption of fruit
and vegetables was no longer restricted to the
wealthy.
Paragraph 4: As the demand for agricultural produce
from both consumers and industry increased,
agricultural land became more valuable and people
tried to work the available land more intensively and
to reclaim more land from wetlands and lakes. In
order to increase production on existing land, the
peasants made more use of crop rotation and, in
particular, began to apply animal waste to the soil
regularly, rather than leaving the fertilization process
up to the grazing livestock. For the first time industrial
waste, such as ash from the soap-boilers, was
collected in the cities and sold in the country as
artificial fertilizer. The increased yield and price of land
justified reclaiming and draining even more land.
5. The word “they ”in the passage refers to
A.merchants
B.hectares
C.windmills
D.drainage pumps
6. According to paragraph 5, which of the following
was an important reason why land-reclamation
projects in the first half of the seventeenth century
proceeded rapidly?
A.Windmills became powerful enough to run
drainage pumps efficiently.
B.Merchants invested large amounts of money in
reclamation.
C.High interest rates discouraged people from
buying land already available.
D.Reclaimed land was much more suitable for
agriculture than the existing land.
7. The word “legendary ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.continuous
B.well documented
○famous
C.expensive
8. Which of the following best describes the
organization of the passage?
A.A presentation of a theory and the evidence in
favor of it
B.A general statement followed by examples and
relevant details
C. A analysis of a problem and its solution
D.A series of statements leading to a conclusion
Paragraph 5: The Dutch battle against the sea is
legendary . Noorderkwartier in Holland, with its
numerous lakes and stretches of water, was
particularly suitable for land reclamation and one of
the biggest projects undertaken there was the
draining of the Beemster lake which began in 1608.
The richest merchants in Amsterdam contributed
money to reclaim a good 7,100 hectares of land.
Forty-three windmills powered the drainage pumps sothat they were able to lease the reclamation to
farmers as early as 1612, with the investors receiving
annual leasing payments at an interest rate of 17
percent. Land reclamation continued, and between
1590 and 1665, almost 100,000 hectares were
reclaimed from the wetland areas of Holland, Zeeland,
and Friesland. However, land reclamation decreased
significantly after the middle of the seventeenth
century because the price of agricultural products
began to fall, making land reclamation far less
profitable in the second part of the century.
Paragraph 6: Dutch agriculture was finally affected by
the general agricultural crisis in Europe during the last
two decades of the seventeenth century. However,
what is astonishing about this is not that Dutch
agriculture was affected by critical phenomena such as
a decrease in sales and production, but the fact that
the crisis appeared only relatively late in Dutch
agriculture. In Europe as a whole, the exceptional
reduction in the population and the related fall in
demand for grain since the beginning of the
seventeenth century had caused the price of
agricultural products to fall. Dutch peasants were able
to remain unaffected by this crisis for a long time
because they had specialized in dairy farming
industrial crops, and horticulture. However, toward
the end of the seventeenth century, they too were
overtaken by the general agricultural crisis.
325【Paragraph 3 】In addition to dairy farming and cultivating industrial crops, a third sector of the Dutch economy
reflected the way in which agriculture was being modernized-horticulture. In the sixteenth century, fruit and
vegetables were to be found only in gardens belonging to wealthy people. This changed in the early part of the
seventeenth century when horticulture became accepted as an agricultural sector. Whole villages began to
cultivate fruit and vegetables. The produce was then transported by water to markets in the cities, where the
consumption of fruit and vegetables was no longer restricted to the wealthy.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage
Some villages specialized in growing cabbages and carrots; others grew onions, mustard, and coriander; and
still others produced fruit and cultivated trees in nurseries.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Direction 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provides below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Agriculture formed one of the primary sectors of the economy in seventeenth-century Netherlands.
A.The Baltic region produced large quantities of grain for export to other regions, including the Netherlands.
B.The richest people grew enough fruits and vegetables to supply the entire country with fresh produce.
C.An agricultural crisis that began in Europe did not affect Dutch land-reclamation projects.
D.Specialization in dairy farming, industrial crops, and horticulture allowed the Dutch to be more productive
than some other regions in Europe.
E.Land reclamation and improvement allowed the Dutch to meet demands for their agricultural products.
F.Because the Dutch had specialized their agricultural output they were less susceptible to the crisis that
Europe experienced from the beginning of the century.
TPO23-3 Rock Art of the Australia Aborigines
1. The word “discern ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.indicate
B.apply
C.identify
D.repeat2. The word “revised ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.discussed
B.raised
C.challenged
D.changed
Paragraph 1: Ever since European first explored
Australia, people have been trying to understand the
ancient rock drawings and cavings created by the
Aborigines, the original inhabitants of the continent.
Early in the nineteenth century, encounters with
Aboriginal rock art tended to be infrequent and open
to speculative interpretation, but since the late
nineteenth century, awareness of the extent and
variety of Australian rock art has been growing. In the
latter decades of the twentieth century there were
intensified efforts to understand and record the
abundance of Australian rock art.
Paragraph 2: The systematic study of this art is arelatively new discipline in Australia. Over the past
four decades new discoveries have steadily added to
the body of knowledge. The most significant data have
come from a concentration on three major questions.
First, what is the age of Australian rock art? Second,
what is its stylistic organization and is it possible todiscern a sequence or a pattern of development
between styles? Third, is it possible to interpret
accurately the subject matter of ancient rock art, bring
to bear all available archaeological techniques and the
knowledge of present-day Aboriginal informants?
Paragraph 3: The age of Australia's rock art isconstantly being revised, and earlier datings have
been proposed as the result of new discoveries.
Currently, reliable scientific evidence dates the earliest
creation of art on rock surfaces in Australia to
somewhere between 30,000 and 50,000 years ago.
This in itself is an almost incomprehensible span of
generations, and one that makes Australia's rock art
the oldest continuous art tradition in the world.
3. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave ways or leave out essential
information
A.The oldest rock art sites have simpler motifs
than the best known sites of Panaramitee North.
B.Because motifs primarily associated with the
Panaramitee region are common in the oldest sites
the term Panaramitee style has become the general
term for rock art of this type.
C.Because the Panaramitee style is so common in
the older sites, researchers have described it most
extensively.
D.The motifs carved in the rocky surface of the
Panaramitee region make up the oldest form of rock
art discovered in Australia.
4. According to paragraph 4, all of the following are
signs of the great age of the Panaramitee engravings
EXCEPT:
A.The engravings consisted of simple animal
drawings.
B..
The engravings were covered with a layer of a
substance known as “desert varnish”.
C.Local Aborigines who were asked knew nothing
about the origin of the engravings.
D.Geologic changes had occurred after the
engravings were made.
Paragraph 4: Although the remarkable antiquity of
Australia's rock art is now established, the sequences
and meanings of its images have been widely debated.
Since the mid-1970s, a reasonably stable picture has
formed of the organization of Australian rock art. In
order to create a sense of structure to this picture,
researchers have relied on a distinction that still
underlies the forms of much indigenous visual
culture—a distinction between geometric and
figurative elements. Simple geometric repeated
patterns—circles, concentric circles, and
lines—constitute the iconography (characteristic
images) of the earliest rock-art sites found across
Australia. The frequency with which certain simple
motifs appear in these oldest sites has led rock-art
researchers to adopt a descriptive term—the
Panaramitee style—a label which takes its name from
the extensive rock pavements at Panaramitee North in
desert South Australia, which are covered with motifs
pecked into the surface. Certain features of these
engravings lead to the conclusion that they are of
great age—geological changes had clearly happened
after the designs had been made and local Aboriginal
informants, when first questioned about them,
seemed to know nothing of their origins. Furthermore,
the designs were covered with “desert varnish,”a glaze
that develops on rock surfaces over thousands of
years of exposure to the elements. The simple motifs
found at Panaramitee are common to many rock-art
sites across Australia. Indeed, sites with engravings of
geometric shapes are also to be found on the island of
Tasmania, which was separated from the mainland of
the continent some 10,000 years ago.
5. Why does the author include information about
Tasmania in paragraph 4?
A.To provide evidence that the Panaramitee style
is widespread and of great age
B.To prove that Aboriginal Australians could not
have made the carvings in Tasmania
C.To indicate how researchers have determined
how long ago Tasmania separated from the mainland
D.To illustrate the importance of geometric rock
art to tourism in Tasmania
6. According to paragraph 5, the complex figurative
style differs from the geometric style in that the
complex figurative style
A.varies significantly from region to region
B.is more meaningful
C.appears on only a few types of rocks
D.has changed little overtime
7. According to paragraph 5, Lesley Maynard made
which of the following suggestions about Australian
rock art?
A.There were a pattern of human figures being
represented in a more complex style than animal
figures.
B.Australian archaeology should concentrate on
determining the sequence of styles that led up to the
Panaramitee style.
C.The great antiquity of Australian rock art would
probably make it impossible to determine the ages of
the various styles found in rock art.
D.The geometric style of Australian rock art was
replaced by increasingly complex figurative styles.
8. In paragraph 5, the author indicates that twentieth
century art has shown that naturalism does not
necessarily follow abstraction in some kind of
predetermined sequence in order to
A.emphasize that it may not be possible to
determine what the figures in ancient rock art
represent
B.suggest a reply to those who have questioned
Maynard's interpretation of the sequence of
Australian rock art
Paragraph 5: In the 1970s when the study of
Australian archaeology was in an exciting phase of
development, with the great antiquity of rock art
becoming clear. Lesley Maynard, the archaeologist
who coined the phrase “Panaramitee style,”suggested
that a sequence could be determined for Australian
rock art, in which a geometric style gave way to a
simple figurative style (outlines of figures and animals),
followed by a range of complex figurative styles that,
unlike the pan-Australian geometric tradition tended
to much greater regional diversity. While accepting
that this sequence fits the archaeological profile of
those sites, which were occupied continuously over
many thousands of years a number of writers have
warned that the underlying assumption of such a
sequence—a development from the simple and the
geometric to the complex and naturalistic—obscures
the cultural continuities in Aboriginal Australia, in
which geometric symbolism remains fundamentally
important. In this context the simplicity of a geometric
motif may be more apparent than real. Motifs of
seeming simplicity can encode complex meanings in
Aboriginal Australia. And has not twentieth-century
art shown that naturalism does not necessarily follow
abstraction in some kind of predetermine sequence?
C.provide a counterexample to Maynard's
interpretation of the sequence of Australian rock art
D.indicate that twentieth century art is more
advanced than ancient rock art
【Paragraph 2 】The systematic study of this art is a relatively new discipline in Australia. Over the past four
decades new discoveries have steadily added to the body of knowledge. The most significant data have come from
a concentration on three major questions. First, what is the age of Australian rock art? Second, what is its stylistic
organization and is it possible to discern a sequence or a pattern of development between styles? Third, is it
possible to interpret accurately the subject matter of ancient rock art, bring to bear all available archaeological
techniques and the knowledge of present-day Aboriginal informants? 
【Paragraph 3 】The age of Australia's rock art is constantly being revised, and earlier datings have been
proposed as the result of new discoveries. Currently, reliable scientific evidence dates the earliest creation of
art on rock surfaces in Australia to somewhere between 30,000 and 50,000 years ago. This in itself is an almost
incomprehensible span of generations, and one that makes Australia's rock art the oldest continuous art tradition
in the world. 
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage
While a great deal of information exists, the answers to these questions are not yet definitive.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.【Direction 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provides below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points
Interest in the rock art of the original inhabitants of Australia has grown over the last two centuries. BCE
A.Late nineteenth century studies of Aboriginal rock art failed to recognize that a variety of styles existed.
B.The extreme age of the earliest Aboriginal rock art has been established but the interpretation of rock art
images is still debated.
C.A sequence from geometric to more representative art fits many sites but does not necessarily indicate a
progression from simple to complex meaning.
D.In determining the way in which Australian rock art was organized, archaeologists have made little
distinction between geometric and figurative elements.
E.Older examples of rock art consist of simple, repeated geometric patterns while later rock art includes
figures and animals.
F.Aboriginal informants were able to explain the meanings of ancient rock art symbols.
TPO24
TPO24-1 Lake Water
1. The phrase So much in the passage refers to
A.the negative effects of overland flow, rain, and
evaporation on river water levels
B.water that a lake loses to outflowing rivers, to the
lake bed, and to evaporation
C.the importance of rivers to the maintenance of lake
water levels
D.the information given about ways that water can
enter or exit a lake2. The word gains in the passage is closest in meaning
to
A.results
B.increases
C.resources
D.savings
3. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 2 about the movement of water into a lake?
A.Heavy rain accounts for most of the water that
enters into lakes.
B.Rainfall replaces approximately the amount of water
lost through evaporation.
C.Overland flow into lakes is reduced by the presence
of forests.
D.Seepage has a smaller effect on water level than any
other input.
4. Why does the author use the phrase Note the word
"net" in the passage?
A.To emphasize the impact of seepage on water levels
B.To point out that seepage is calculated differently
from river flows and atmospheric exchanges
C.To compare the different methods of calculating
seepage
D.To emphasize the difficulty of obtaining specific
values for seepage inputs and outputs
Where does the water in a lake come from, and how
does water leave it? Water enters a lake from
inflowing rivers, from underwater seeps and springs,
from overland flow off the surrounding land, and from
rain falling directly on the lake surface. Water leaves a
lake via outflowing rivers, by soaking into the bed ofthe lake, and by evaporation. So much is obvious.
The questions become more complicated when actual
volumes of water are considered: how much water
enters and leaves by each route? Discovering the
inputs and outputs of rivers is a matter of measuring
the discharges of every inflowing and outflowing
stream and river. Then exchanges with the
atmosphere are calculated by finding the differencebetween the gains from rain, as measured (rather
roughly) by rain gauges, and the losses by evaporation,
measured with models that correct for the other
sources of water loss. For the majority of lakes,
certainly those surrounded by forests, input from
overland flow is too small to have a noticeable effect.
Changes in lake level not explained by river flows plus
exchanges with the atmosphere must be due to the
net difference between what seeps into the lake from
the groundwater and what leaks into the groundwater.
Note the word "net" : measuring the actual amounts
of groundwater seepage into the lake and out of the
lake is a much more complicated matter than merely
inferring their difference.
5. According to paragraph 3, which of the following
best describes a seepage-dominated lake?
A.A lake that is fed by streams but still has fluctuating
water levels
B.A lake with a constant water level that has no
streams or rivers as inputs
C.A lake with a stream flowing into it and a stream
flowing out of it
D.A lake that has surface and underground inputs but
loses water during dry seasons
6. It can be inferred from paragraph 4 that the length
of time a given molecule of water remains in a lake
A.depends entirely upon the average speed of a lake' s
currents
B.can be measured by the volume of the lake alone
C.can be greater or lesser than the residence time
D.is similar to the length of time all other molecules
remain in that lake
Once all this information has been gathered, it
becomes possible to judge whether a lake's flow is
mainly due to its surface inputs and outputs or to its
underground inputs and outputs. If the former are
greater, the lake is a surface-water-dominated lake; if
the latter, it is a seepage-dominated lake. Occasionally,
common sense tells you which of these two
possibilities applies. For example, a pond in hilly
country that maintains a steady water level all through
a dry summer in spite of having no streams flowing
into it must obviously be seepagedominated. Conversely, a pond with a stream flowing
in one end and out the other, which dries up when the
stream dries up, is clearly surface water dominated.
By whatever means, a lake is constantly gaining water
and losing water: its water does not just sit there, or,
anyway, not for long. This raises the matter of a lake's
residence time. The residence time is the average
length of time that any particular molecule of water
remains in the lake, and it is calculated by dividing the
volume of water in the lake by the rate at which water
leaves the lake. The residence time is an average; the
time spent in the lake by a given molecule (if we could
follow its fate) would depend on the route it took: it
might flow through as part of the fastest, most direct
current, or it might circle in a backwater for an
indefinitely long time.
7. According to paragraph 5, Lake Erie's residence time
is lower than Lake Ontario's for which of the following
reasons?
A.Lake Erie has a larger area than Lake Ontario.
B.Lake Ontario is shallower than Lake Erie.
C.Lake Ontario has a greater volume than Lake Erie.
D.Lake Erie receives less rainfall than Lake Ontario.
11.According to paragraph 6, which of the following
explains the increase in residence time of some lakes
of northwestern Ontario?
A.The amount of water flowing into the lakes has
increased.
B.The rate of evaporation has decreased more sharply
than the amount of rainfall.
C.The renewal of the lakes' water has slowed due to
changes in climate.
D.Plants have required less water from the lakes
Residence times vary enormously. They range from a
few days for small lakes up to several hundred years
for large ones; Lake Tahoe, in California, has a
residence time of 700 years. The residence times for
the Great Lakes of North America, namely, Lakes
Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie, and Ontario, are,
respectively, 190,100,22,2.5, and 6 years. Lake Erie's is
the lowest: although its area is larger than Lake
Ontario' s, its volume is less than one-third as great
because it is so shallow-less than 20 meters on
average.
A.given lake's residence time is by no means a fixed
quantity. It depends on the rate at which water enters
the lake, and that depends on the rainfall and the
evaporation rate. Climatic change (the result of global
warming?) is dramatically affecting the residence
times of some lakes in northwestern Ontario, Canada.
In the period 1970 to 1986, rainfall in the area
decreased from 1,000 millimeters to 650 millimeters
per annum, while above-average temperatures
speeded up the evapotranspiration rate (the rate at
which water is lost to the atmosphere through
evaporation and the processes of plant life).
The result has been that the residence time of one of
the lakes increased from 5 to 18 years during the
study period. The slowing down of water renewal
leads to a chain of further consequences; it causes
dissolved chemicals to become increasingly
concentrated, and this, in turn, has a marked effect on
all living things in the lake.
333Once all this information has been gathered, it becomes possible to judge whether a lake's flow is mainly due to its
surface inputs and outputs or to its underground inputs and outputs. ▌If the former are greater, the lake is a
surface-water-dominated lake; if the latter, it is a seepage-dominated lake. ▌Occasionally, common sense tells
you which of these two possibilities applies. ▌For example, a pond in hilly country that maintains a steady water
level all through a dry summer in spite of having no streams flowing into it must obviously be seepage dominated.
Conversely, a pond with a stream flowing in one end and out the other, which dries up when the stream dries up,
is clearly surface water dominated. ▌
9.Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
Of course, a lake may be neither surface-water-nor seepage-dominated if, for example, its inputs are
predominantly surface and its outputs are predominantly seepage.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage.
This question is worth 2 points. Water enters, remains, and eventually leaves a lake in
a variety of ways.
A. By measuring the water quantities at each of a lake's inputs and outputs, it can be determined whether water
enters the lake mainly from surface or groundwater sources.
B. Changes in lake level and volume are caused principally by the amount of evaporation of water into the
atmosphere.
C. It is sometimes possible to decide whether a lake is surface water dominated or seepage dominated by simple
observation at different seasons.
D. The average period of time that molecules of water spend in a lake—the residence time—varies from lake to
lake and overtime within a particular lake.
E. The residence times of surface-water-dominated lakes are usually longer than those of seepage-dominated
lakes
F. The residence time of a lake frequently depends on the kinds of organisms to be found in the lake.
TPO24-2 Breathing During Sleep
1. According to paragraph 1, which of the following
can be inferred about the diaphragm during sleep?
A.During sleep the diaphragm requires increased
movement of the rib cage.
B.The diaphragm helps with breathing as movements
of the rib cage decrease during sleep.
C.The diaphragm requires a great amount of pressure
to function properly.
D.The diaphragm contributes to the effective
functioning of the rib cage.
Of all the physiological differences in human sleep
compared with wakefulness that have been
discovered in the last decade, changes in respiratory
control are most dramatic. Not only are there
differences in the level of the functioning of
respiratory systems, there are even changes in how
they function. Movements of the rib cage for
breathing are reduced during sleep, making the
contractions of the diaphragm more important. Yet
because of the physics of lying down, the stomach
applies weight against the diaphragm and makes it
more difficult for the diaphragm to do its job. However,
there are many other changes that affect respiration
when asleep.
During wakefulness, breathing is controlled by two
interacting systems. The first is an automatic,
metabolic system whose control is centered in the
brain stem. It subconsciously adjusts breathing rate
and depth in order to regulate the levels of carbon
dioxide (CO2) and oxygen (O2), and the acid-base ratio
in the blood. The second system is the voluntary,
behavioral system. Its control center is based in the
forebrain, and it regulates breathing for use in speech,
singing, sighing, and so on. It is capable of ignoring or
overriding the automatic, metabolic system and
produces an irregular pattern of breathing.
3. What is the author's purpose in stating that inhaling
is like sucking air out of a balloon ?
A.To refute the argument that additional effort is
necessary for breathing during sleep
B.To argue that REM sleep is more important than
NREM sleep
C.To illustrate the difficulty of breathing during sleep
D.To illustrate how blockage of narrow passages can
be prevented during sleep
4. All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 4 as
being characteristic of breathing during sleep EXCEPT
A.relaxation of the muscles involved in the respiratory
system
B.changes in resistance between the two sides of the
nose
C.easier airflow in the passages of the upper airway
D.absence of certain complex muscle interactions
During NREM (the phase of sleep in which there is no
rapid eye movement) breathing becomes deeper and
more regular, but there is also a decrease in the
breathing rate, resulting in less air being exchanged
overall. This occurs because during NREM sleep theautomatic, metabolic system has exclusive control
over breathing and the body uses less oxygen and
produces less carbon dioxide. Also, during sleep the
automatic metabolic system is less responsive to
carbon dioxide levels and oxygen levels in the blood.
Two things result from these changes in breathing
control that occur during sleep. First, there may be a
brief cessation or reduction of breathing when falling
asleep as the sleeper waxes and wanes between sleep
and wakefulness and their differing control
mechanisms. Second, once sleep is fully obtained,
there is an increase of carbon dioxide and a decrease
of oxygen in the blood that persists during NREM.
But that is not all that changes. During all phases of
sleep, several changes in the air passages have been
observed. It takes twice as much effort to breathe
during sleep because of greater resistance to airflow
in the airways and changes in the efficiency of the
muscles used for breathing. Some of the muscles that
help keep the upper airway open when breathing tend
to become more relaxed during sleep, especially
during REM (the phase of sleep in which there is rapideye movement). Without this muscular action, inhaling
is like sucking air out of a balloon —the narrow
passages tend to collapse. Also there is a regular cycle
of change in resistance between the two sides of the
nose. If something blocks the "good" side, such as
congestion from allergies or a cold, then resistance
increases dramatically. Coupled with these factors is
the loss of the complex interactions among the
muscles that can change the route of airflow from
nose to mouth.
5. According to paragraph 5, what happens during
NREM sleep when inhaling is difficult?
A.There is an immediate, automatic, adaptive increase
in breathing effort.
B.The sleeping person takes several inadequate
breaths before the breathing effort is adjusted.
C.The coughing reflex causes the breathing effort to
adjust.
D.The airways become cleared as the blood removes
irritants.
6. It can be inferred from paragraph 5 that a very mild
irritation during sleep will likely cause the sleeping
person to
A.increase the breathing effort
B.wake up and remove the source of irritation
C.cough while still sleeping
D.stop breathing temporarily while still sleeping7. The word resume in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.reduce
B.stop
C.Readjust
D.restart
8. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Because breathing is more shallow and irregular in
REM than in NREM, less air is exchanged in REM.
B.Breathing in NREM is less effective than breathing in
REM because of irregular episodes of rapid breathing
during NREM.
C.Because breathing is more rapid in NREM sleep than
in REM sleep, breathing often becomes shallow.
D.Although REM has brief episodes of shallow
breathing or lack of breathing, breathing is more rapid
than in NREM.Other respiratory regulating mechanisms apparently
cease functioning during sleep. For example, during
wakefulness there is an immediate, automatic,
adaptive increase in breathing effort when inhaling is
made more difficult (such as breathing through a
restrictive face mask). This reflexive adjustment is
totally absent during NREM sleep. Only after several
inadequate breaths under such conditions, resulting in
the considerable elevation of carbon dioxide and
reduction of oxygen in the blood, is breathing effort
adjusted. Finally, the coughing reflex in reaction to
irritants in the airway produces not a cough during
sleep but a cessation of breathing. If the irritation is
severe enough, a sleeping person will arouse, clear theairway, then resume breathing and likely return to
sleep.
Additional breathing changes occur during REM sleep
that are even more dramatic than the changes that
occur during NREM. The amount of air exchanged is
even lower in REM than NREM because, although
breathing is more rapid in REM,it is also more irregular,
with brief episodes of shallow breathing or absence of
breathing. In addition, breathing during REM depends
much more on the action of the diaphragm and much
less on rib cage action.
337Of all the physiological differences in human sleep compared with wakefulness that have been discovered in the
last decade, changes in respiratory control are most dramatic. Not only are there differences in the level of the
functioning of respiratory systems, there are even changes in how they function. Movements of the rib cage for
breathing are reduced during sleep, making the contractions of the diaphragm more important. ▌Yet because of
the physics of lying down, the stomach applies weight against the diaphragm and makes it more difficult for the
diaphragm to do its job. ▌However, there are many other changes that affect respiration when asleep.
▌During wakefulness, breathing is controlled by two interacting systems. ▌The first is an automatic, metabolic
system whose control is centered in the brain stem. It subconsciously adjusts breathing rate and depth in order to
regulate the levels of carbon dioxide (CO2) and oxygen (O2), and the acid-base ratio in the blood. The second
system is the voluntary, behavioral system. Its control center is based in the forebrain, and it regulates breathing
for use in speech, singing, sighing, and so on. It is capable of ignoring or overriding the automatic, metabolic
system and produces an irregular pattern of breathing.
9. Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage
To better understand breathing during sleep, it is, however, helpful to first understand how respiration works in
general.
10. Directions: From the seven statements below, select the statements that correctly characterize breathing
during wakefulness and those statements that correctly characterize breathing during sleep. Drag each answer
choice you select into the appropriate box of the table. Two of the answer choices will NOT be used. This question
is worth 3 points.
A. The role of the rib cage increases and the role of the diaphragm decreases.
B. Carbon dioxide in blood rises and oxygen drops.
C. The coughing reflex is extremely complex.
D. A great deal of effort is used for breathing.
E. Upper airways are resistant to colds and allergies.
F. There is a drop in the volume of air that is exchanged.
G. Automatic and voluntary respiratory systems are both involved.
TPO24-3 Moving into Pueblos
1. The word traumatic meaning to
A.Essential
B.highly stressful
C.highly unusual
D.unwise
2. According to paragraph 1, before the thirteenth
century the people of southwestern North America
lived in households that A shared daily chores with
neighboring households
B.occupied dwellings that were built into the sides of
cliffs
C.were largely free to conduct their lives as they
pleased
D.enforced common standards of behavior and
cooperative conduct within their communities
In the Mesa Verde area of the ancient North American
Southwest, living patterns changed in the thirteenth
century, with large numbers of people moving into
large communal dwellings called pueblos, often
constructed at the edges of canyons, especially on the
sides of cliffs. Abandoning small extended-family
households to move into these large pueblos with
dozens if not hundreds of other people wasprobably traumatic. Few of the cultural traditions and
rules that today allow us to deal with dense
populations existed for these people accustomed to
household autonomy and the ability to move around
the landscape almost at will. And besides the
awkwardness of having to share walls with neighbors,
living in aggregated pueblos introduced other
problems. For people in cliff dwellings, hauling water,
wood, and food to their homes was a major chore.
The stress on local resources, especially in the
firewood needed for daily cooking and warmth, was
particularly intense, and conditions in aggregated
pueblos were not very hygienic.
3. According to paragraph 3, which of the following
was one of the consequences of increasing population
densities? A People were increasingly crowded into
collections of large housing units.
B.People stopped planting crops that have relatively
low yields.
C.Domestic buildings were pushed beyond the canyon
limits.
D.The natural landscape was destroyed.
4. Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage?Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Some scholars even claim that the intensification of
farmers' various efforts during the 1200s led to further
population growth and the consequent need for more
arable land.
B.Evidence of intensifying agriculture in the 1200s
indicates a need to feed a larger population and so
extends the argument that a growing population was
the cause of the move to pueblos.
C.During the 1200s, farmers met the demand for more
arable land, but they also succeeded in cultivating
existing land more intensively with the help of
agricultural construction projects.
D.Some scholars feel strongly that the construction of
small dams, reservoirs, terraces, and field houses in
the thirteenth century is independent evidence for
growth in the number of people.
Given all the disadvantages of living in aggregated
towns, why did people in the thirteenth century move
into these closely packed quarters? For transitions of
such suddenness, archaeologists consider either pull
factors (benefits that drew families together) or push
factors (some external threat or crisis that forced
people to aggregate). In this case, push explanations
dominate.
♦Population growth is considered a particularly
influential push. After several generations of
population growth, people packed the landscape in
densities so high that communal pueblos may have
been a necessary outcome. Around Sand Canyon, for
example, populations grew from 5 -12 people per
square kilometer in the tenth century to as many as 30
- 50 by the 1200s. As densities increased, domestic
architecture became larger, culminating in crowdedpueblos. Some scholars expand on this idea by
emphasizing a corresponding need for arable land to
feed growing numbers of people: construction of
small dams, reservoirs, terraces, and field houses
indicates that farmers were intensifying their efforts
during the 1200s. Competition for good farmland may
also have prompted people to bond together to assert
rights over the best fields.
7. The word transition in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.change
B.climate
C.decline
D.problem
5.Why does the author state that "Growing food at
these elevations is always difficult because of the
short growing season"?
A.To explain why the higher elevations were always
relatively sparsely populated
B.To suggest that any worsening of conditions would
have significant consequences
C.To emphasize how resourceful the people growing
food at these elevations were
D.To argue that farming was not the primary source of
food at high elevations
6. According to paragraph 4, what did farmers do in
response to falling temperatures during the Little Ice
Age?
A.Moved to areas away from Mesa Verde
B.Moved closer to the northeastern part of Mesa
Verde
C.Began to cultivate crops adapted to a short growing
season
D.Gave up the cultivation of the highest-lying lands
Another important push was the onset of the Little Ice
Age, a climatic phenomenon that led to cooler
temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere. Although
the height of the Little Ice Age was still around the
corner, some evidence suggests that temperatures
were falling during the thirteenth century. The
environmental changes associated withthis transition are not fully understood, but people
living closest to the San Juan Mountains, to the
northeast of Mesa Verde, were affected first. Growing
food at these elevations is always difficult because of
the short growing season. As the Little Ice Age
progressed, farmers probably moved their fields to
lower elevations, infringing on the lands of other
farmers and pushing people together, thus
contributing to the aggregations. Archaeologists
identify a corresponding shift in populations toward
the south and west toward Mesa Verde and away
from higher elevations.
7. According to paragraph 5, major ceremonial events
were occasions for
A.leaders to persuade people from the countryside to
move into a pueblo
B.farmers to collect information about where crops
could be reliably grown
C.people to develop better techniques for producing
pottery and crafts
D.people in the early Puebloan era to share farm and
craft products
8.Paragraph 5 supports which of the following
statements about cooperation among the people in
the Mesa Verde area from the eleventh through the
thirteenth century?
A.Cooperation allowed many households to give up
farming and to specialize in making pottery and crafts.
B.People went from exchanging food and crafts they
individually produced to sharing in a cooperative
effort to produce as much food as possible.
C.Overtime there was less cooperation as farmers
competed with each other for trade with distant
areas.
D.Individuals stopped cooperating with each other
because they did not have enough food for
themselves.
In the face of all these pushes, people in the Mesa
Verde area had yet another reason to move into
communal villages: the need for greater cooperation.
Sharing and cooperation were almost certainly part of
early Puebloan life, even for people living in largely
independent single-household residences scattered
across the landscape. Archaeologists find that even
the most isolated residences during the eleventh and
twelfth centuries obtained some pottery, and
probably food, from some distance away, while major
ceremonial events were opportunities for sharing food
and crafts. Scholars believe that this cooperation
allowed people to contend with a patchy environment
in which precipitation and other resources varied
across the landscape: if you produce a lot of food one
year, you might trade it for pottery made by a distant
ally who is having difficulty with crops—and the next
year, the flow of goods might go in the opposite
direction. But all of this appears to have changed
thirteenth century. Although the climate remained as
unpredictable as ever between one year and the next,
it became much less locally diverse. In a bad year for
farming, everyone was equally affected. No longer was
it helpful to share widely. Instead, the most sensible
thing would be for neighbors to combine efforts to
produce as much food as possible, and thus
aggregated towns were a sensible arrangement.
342In the Mesa Verde area of the ancient North American Southwest, living patterns changed in the thirteenth
century, with large numbers of people moving into large communal dwellings called pueblos, often constructed at
the edges of canyons, especially on the sides of cliffs. Abandoning small extended-family households to move into
these large pueblos with dozens if not hundreds of other people was probably traumatic. Few of the cultural
traditions and rules that today allow us to deal with dense populations existed for these people accustomed to
household autonomy and the ability to move around the landscape almost at will. ▌And besides the
awkwardness of having to share walls with neighbors, living in aggregated pueblos introduced other
problems. ▌For people in cliff dwellings, hauling water, wood, and food to their homes was a major
chore.▌The stress on local resources, especially in the firewood needed for daily cooking and warmth, was
particularly intense, and conditions in aggregated pueblos were not very hygienic. ▌9. Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
Performing everyday household tasks required more effort.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage.
This question is worth 2 points. In the thirteenth century, the people in the Mesa
Verde area went from living in scattered independent households to living in large pueblos.
A. Because the thirteenth-century inhabitants of the Mesa Verde area did not have the cultural expectations of
today's city dwellers, they easily adapted to communal life.
B. Even though living in pueblos had disadvantages, the population of the area had grown so large that there may
have been no other arrangement that would have met its needs.
C. From the eleventh century onward, farmers began to increase food production on existing farmland and
started bringing more land under cultivation.
D. A development that contributed to increasing population densities was a cooling climate that led many people
to leave the coldest areas and crowd into climatically more favorable areas.
E. The primary reason for moving to pueblos was the social benefits associated with communal life.
F. People were brought together by the need to produce food cooperatively, as the use of food surpluses in one
place to relieve shortages in another ended due to a change in climate.
TPO25
TPO25-1 The surface of Mars
1. The word “ distinctive ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Deep
B.Complex
C.Characteristic
D.Ancient
2. According to paragraphs 1 and 2, which of the
following is NOT true of the shield volcanoes on the
Tharsis bulge?
A.They have broad, sloping sides.
B.They are smaller than the largest volcano on Mars.
C.They have channels that resemble the lava channels
of volcanoes on Earth.
D.They are over 25 kilometers tall.
The surface of Mars shows a wide range of geologic
features, including huge volcanoes-the largest known
in the solar system-and extensive impact cratering.
Three very large volcanoes are found on the Tharsis
bulge, an enormous geologic area near Mars's equator.
Northwest of Tharsis is the largest volcano of all:
Olympus Mons, with a height of 25 kilometers and
measuring some 700 kilometers in diameter at its base.
The three large volcanoes on the Tharsis bulge are a
little smaller-a “mere” 18 kilometers high.
None of these volcanoes was formed as a result of
collisions between plates of the Martian crust-there is
no plate motion on Mars. Instead, they are shield
volcanoes — volcanoes with broad, sloping slidesformed by molten rock. All four show distinctivelava
channels and other flow features similar to those
found on shield volcanoes on Earth. Images of the
Martian surface reveal many hundreds of volcanoes.
Most of the largest volcanoes are associated with the
Tharsis bulge, but many smaller ones are found in the
northern plains.
3. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Although direct evidence of recent eruptions is
lacking, scientists believe that these volcanoes were
active as recently as 100 million years ago.
B.Scientists estimate that volcanoes active more
recently than 100 years ago will still have extensive
impact cratering on their slopes.
C.If, as some evidence suggests, these volcanoes
erupted as recently as 100 million years ago, they may
continue to be intermittently active.
D.Although these volcanoes were active as recently as
100 million years ago, there is no direct evidence of
recent or ongoing eruptions.
The great height of Martian volcanoes is a direct
consequence of the planet's low surface gravity. As
lava flows and spreads to form a shield volcano, the
volcano's eventual height depends on the new
mountain's ability to support its own weight. The
lower the gravity, the lesser the weight and the
greater the height of the mountain. It is no accident
that Maxwell Mons on Venus and the Hawaiian shield
volcanoes on Earth rise to about the same height
(about 10 kilometers) above their respective
bases-Earth and Venus have similar surface gravity.
Mars's surface gravity is only 40 percent that of Earth,
so volcanoes rise roughly 2.5 times as high. Are the
Martian shield volcanoes still active? Scientists have
no direct evidence for recent or ongoing eruptions,
but if these volcanoes were active as recently as 100
million years ago (an estimate of the time of last
eruption based on the extent of impact cratering on
their slopes), some of them may still be at least
intermittently active . Millions of years, though, may
pass between eruptions.
4. The word “ considerably ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Frequently
B.Significantly
C.Clearly
D.Surprisingly
5.According to paragraph 4, what is demonstrated by
the fact that craters fill in much faster on Mars than on
the Moon?
A.Erosion from meteo ritic impacts takes place more
quickly on Mars than on the Moon.
B.There is more dust on Mars than on the Moon.
C.The surface of Mars is a dry desert.
D.Wind is a powerful eroding force on Mars.
6. In paragraph 4, why does the author point out that
Mars has few ancient craters that are less than 5
kilometers in diameter?
A.To explain why scientists believe that the surface
matter filling Martian craters is mostly dust
B.To explain why scientists believe that the impact
craters on Mars were created by meteoroids
C.To support the claim that the Martian atmosphere is
an efficient erosive agent
D.To argue that Mars experienced fewer ancient
impacts than the Moon did
7. According to paragraph 5, what have scientists been
able to determine from studies of large impact
cratering on Mars?
A.Some Martian volcanoes are much older than was
once thought.
B.The age of Mars's surface can vary from area to
area.
C.Large impact craters are not reliable indicators of
age in areas with high volcanic activity.
D.Some areas of the Martian surface appear to be
older than they actually are.
Another prominent feature of Mars's surface is
cratering. The Mariner spacecraft found that the
surface of Mars, as well as that of its two moons, is
pitted with impact craters formed by meteoroids
falling in from space. As on our Moon, the smaller
craters are often filled with surface matter-mostly
dust-confirming that Mars is a dry desert world.
However, Martian craters get filledin considerablyfaster than their lunar counterparts. On
the Moon, ancient craters less than 100 meters across
(corresponding to depths of about 20 meters) have
been obliterated, primarily by meteoritic erosion. On
Mars, there are relatively few craters less than 5
kilometers in diameter. The Martian atmosphere is an
efficient erosive agent, with Martian winds
transporting dust from place to place and erasing
surface features much faster than meteoritic impacts
alone can obliterate them.
As on the Moon, the extent of large impact cratering
(i.e. craters too big to have been filled in by erosion
since they were formed) serves as an age indicator for
the Martian surface. Age estimates ranging from four
billion years for Mars's southern highlands to a few
hundred million years in the youngest volcanic areas
were obtained in this way.
8. According to paragraph 6, the ejecta of Mars's
crater Yuty differs from the ejecta of the Moon's
Copernicus crater in that the ejecta of the Yuty crater
A.Has now become part of a permafrost layer
B.Contains a large volume of dust, soil and boulders
C.Suggests that liquid once came out of the surface at
the crater site
D.Was thrown a comparatively long distance from the
center of the crater
The detailed appearance of Martian impact craters
provides an important piece of information about
conditions just below the planet's surface. Martian
craters are surrounded by ejecta (debris formed as a
result of an impact) that looks quite different from its
lunar counterparts. A comparison of the Copernicus
crater on the Moon with the (fairly typical) crater Yuty
on Mars demonstrates the differences. The ejecta
surrounding the lunar crater is just what one would
expect from an explosion ejecting a large volume of
dust, soil, and boulders. However, the ejecta on Mars
gives the distinct impression of a liquid that has
splashed or flowed out of crater. Geologists think that
this fluidized ejecta crater indicates that a layer of
permafrost, or water ice, lies just a few meters under
the surface. Explosive impacts heated and liquefied
the ice, resulting in the fluid appearance of the ejecta.
The detailed appearance of Martian impact craters provides an important piece of information about conditions
just below the planet's surface. Martian craters are surrounded by ejecta (debris formed as a result of an impact)
that looks quite different from its lunar counterparts. A comparison of the Copernicus crater on the Moon with
the (fairly typical) crater Yuty on Mars demonstrates the differences. The ejecta surrounding the lunar crater is just
what one would expect from an explosion ejecting a large volume of dust, soil, and boulders. ▌However, the
ejecta on Mars gives the distinct impression of a liquid that has splashed or flowed out of crater. ▌Geologists
think that this fluidized ejecta crater indicates that a layer of permafrost, or water ice, lies just a few meters under
the surface. ▌Explosive impacts heated and liquefied the ice, resulting in the fluid appearance of the ejecta. ▌9. Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
This surface feature has led to speculation about what may lie under Mars's surface.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Volcanoes and impact craters are major features of
Martian geology.
A. Plate motion on Mars, once considered to have played no role in shaping the planet's surface, is now seen as
being directly associated with the planet's earliest volcanoes.
B. Mars has shield volcanoes, some of which are extremely tall because of the planet's low surface gravity.
C. Although the erosive power of the Martian atmosphere ensures that Mars has fewer craters than the Moon
does, impact craters are prominent on Mars' s surface.
D. Scientists cannot yet reliably estimate the age of the Martian surface because there has been too much erosion
of it.
E. Scientists have been surprised to discover that conditions just below the surface of Mars are very similar to
conditions just below the surface of the Moon
F. Studies of crater ejecta have revealed the possibility of a layer of permafrost below the surface of Mars.
TPO25-2 The Decline of Venetian Shipping
1. The word “resurgence” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.transformation
B.comeback
C.program
D.expansion
2. According to paragraph 2, which of the following
contributed to the decline of Venetian shipping?
A.The loss of trade in Adriatic Sea
B.The move from galleys to round ships
C.The decreased demand for galleys
D.The doubling of sailor's wages
3. All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 2 as
ways that Venice provided rowers for its galley EXCEPT
A.Requiring business associations to provide sailors
B.Recruiting sailors from other cities in northern Italy
C.Drafting Venetian citizens into services as rowers
D.Appealing to the traditions of Venice as a sea power.
In the late thirteenth century, northern Italian cities
such as Genoa, Florence, and Venice began an
economic resurgence that made them into the most
important economic centers of Europe. By the
seventeenth century, however, other European
powers had taken over, as the Italian cities lost much
of their economic might.
This decline can be seen clearly in the changes that
affected Venetian shipping and trade. First, Venice's
intermediary functions in the Adriatic Sea, where it
had dominated the business of shipping for other
parties, were lost to direct trading. In the fifteenth
century there was little problem recruiting sailors to
row the galleys (large ships propelled by oars): guilds
(business associations) were required to provide
rowers, and through a draft system free citizensserved compulsorily when called for. In the early
sixteenth century the shortage of rowers was not
serious because the demand for galleys was limited by
a move to round ships (round-hulled ships with more
cargo space), with required fewer rowers. But the
shortage of crews proved to be a greater and greater
problem, despite continuous appeal to Venic's
tradition of maritime greatness. Even though sailors'
wages doubled among the northern Italian cities from
1550 to 1590, this did not elicit an increased supply.
4. All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 3
and 4 as contributing to the problems of the Venetian
shipbuilding industry at the end of the sixteenth
century EXCEPT
A.The quality of work performed in the Arsenale had
declined
B.Venetian–built ships were heavy and generally
inefficient
C.Arsenale shipbuilders worked more slowly
D.Only a few merchants controlled the buying and
selling of most of the Venetian-built ships
The problem in shipping extended to the Arsenale,
Venice's huge and powerful shipyard. Timber ran short,
and it was necessary to procure it from farther and
farther away. In ancient Roman times, the Italian
peninsula had great forest of fir preferred for warships,
but scarcity was apparent as early as the early
fourteenth century. Arsenale officers first brought
timber from the foothills of the Alps, then from north
toward Trieste, and finally from across the Adriatic.
Private shipbuilders were required to buy their oak
abroad. As the costs of shipbuilding rose, Venice clungto its outdated standard while the Dutch were
innovation in the lighter and more easily handled
ships.
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage?Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The loss of ships in battle at the end of the sixteenth
century showed that Venetian shipbuilders lacked the
skills they had possessed at the beginning of the
century.
B.Venetian shipbuilding failed to quickly replace the
ships lost in battle at the end of the sixteenth century
as it would have done earlier in the century.
C.Frederic Lane noted that Venice lost ships in battle
at the end of the sixteenth century, showing that
Venetian shipbuilding was not longer known for its
reliability.
D.Venetian shipbuilding had been known for its high
quality of work at the beginning of the sixteenth
century, but toward the end of the century Venetian
ships were poorer in quality.
6.The word “conventional” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.informal
B.logical
C.correct
D.usual
The step from buying foreign timber to buying foreign
ships was regarded as a short one, especially when
complaints were heard in the latter sixteenth century
that the standards and traditions of the Arsenale were
running down. Work was stretched out and done
poorly. Older workers had been allowed to stop work
a half hour before the regular time, and in 1601
younger works left with them. Merchants complained
that the privileges reserved for Venetian-built and
owned ships were first extended to those Venetians
who bought ships from abroad and then toforeign-built and owned vessels. Historian Frederic
Lane observes that after the loss of ships in battle in
the late sixteenth century, the shipbuilding industry
no longer had the capacity to recover that it had
displayed at the start of the century.
The conventional explanation for the loss of Venetian
dominance in trade is establishment of the Portuguese
direct sea route to the East, replacing the overland Silk
Road from the Black sea and the highly profitable
Indian Ocean-caravan-eastern Mediterranean route to
Venice. The Portuguese Vasco da Gama's Voyage
around southern Africa to India took place at the end
of the fifteenth century, and by 1502 the trans-
Abrabian caravan route had been cut off by political
unrest.
7.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 6 about the Venetian Council 's decision
concerning the use of round ships?
A.It resulted in a return to profitable in luxury goods
for Venetian merchants.
B.Ultimately it did not restore
the superiority in the spice trade that Venice had
enjoyed earlier.
C.It eventually enabled Venetian
merchants to increase the quantity and price of the
spices they sold in Europe.
D.It means a long-awaited
improvement in the fortunes of the shipbuilding
industry in Venice.
8.According to paragraphs 6, in the sixteenth century
the price of spices declined because
A.France and Germany established monopolies and
dictated prices
B.Venetian merchant galleys competed with Venetian
round ships for the spice trade
C.More spices were available because both the
Venetians and the Portuguese were importing them
D.Increased demand for silk, dyes, cotton and gold
meant that people had less money to spend on spices.
The Venetian Council finally allowed round ships to
enter the trade that was previously reserved for
merchant galleys, thus reducing transport cost by one
third. Prices of spices delivered by ship from the
eastern Mediterranean came to equal those of spices
transported by Paortuguese vessels, but the increase
in quantity with both routes in operation drove the
price far down. Gradually, Venice's role as a storage
and distribution center for spices and silk, dyes cotton,
and gold decayed, and by the early seventeenth
century Venice had lost its monopoly in markets such
as France and southern Germany.
Venetian shipping had started to decline from about
1530-before the entry into the Mediterranean of large
volumes of Dutch and British shipping-and was clearly
outclassed by the end of the century. A contemporary
of Shakespeare (1564-1616) observed that the
productivity of Italian shipping had declined,
compared with that of the British, because of
conservatism and loss of expertise. Moreover, Italian
sailors were deserting and emigrating, and captains,
no longer recruited from the ranks of nobles, were
weak on navigations.
Venetian shipping had started to decline from about
1530-before the entry into the Mediterranean of large
volumes of Dutch and British shipping-and was clearly
outclassed by the end of the century. A contemporary
of Shakespeare (1564-1616) observed that the
productivity of Italian shipping had declined,
compared with that of the British, because of
conservatism and loss of expertise. Moreover, Italian
sailors were deserting and emigrating, and captains,
no longer recruited from the ranks of nobles, were
weak on navigations.
352This decline can be seen clearly in the changes that affected Venetian shipping and trade. First, Venice's
intermediary functions in the Adriatic Sea, where it had dominated the business of shipping for other parties,
were lost to direct trading. In the fifteenth century there was little problem recruiting sailors to row the galleys
(large ships propelled by oars): guilds (business associations) were required to provide rowers, and through a draft
system free citizens served compulsorily when called for. ▌In the early sixteenth century the shortage of rowers
was not serious because the demand for galleys was limited by a move to round ships (round-hulled ships with
more cargo space), with required fewer rowers. ▌But the shortage of crews proved to be a greater and greater
problem, despite continuous appeal to Venic's tradition of maritime greatness. ▌Even though sailors' wages
doubled among the northern Italian cities from 1550 to 1590, this did not elicit an increased supply. ▌
9.Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
The increase in reward still did not attract young people to this hard life, and convicted criminals and slaves were
pressed into services.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The loss of power and prestige of Italian cities by the
sixteenth century is clearly seen in the decline of Venetian shipping.
A. Venetian ships were famous for carrying large cargoes of spices and luxury goods around the world in fast,
oar-driven galleys.
B. Venetian round ships bringing spices and silk from the East helped drive prices down so that ordinary people
could afford to buy them
C. A shortage of timber for building the traditional galleys and a lack of sailors to row them meant a loss of
Venetian shipping business.
D. Venice failed to keep up with improvement in ship design, and the cost of shipbuilding rose a quality and
efficiency declined.
E. The Venetian Council made sure that Venetian-built and Eowned ships kept special privileges in transporting
luxury goods in and out of Venice.
F. The Portuguese direct sea route to the East adversely affected Venetian trade, and Venice fell behind the Dutch
and the British in the quality of their ships and sailing skills.
TPO25-3 The Evolutionary Origin of Plants
1. The phrase “subjected to”in the passage is closest
in
A.restricted by
B.distant from
C.exposed to
D.combined with
Paragraph 1: The evolutionary history of plants has
been marked by a series of adaptations. The ancestors
of plants were photosynthetic single-celled organisms
that gave rise to plants presumably lacked true roots,
stems, leaves, and complex reproductive structures
such as flowers. All of these features appeared later in
the evolutionary history of plants. Of today's different
groups of algae, green algae are probably the most
similar to ancestral plants. This supposition stems
from the close phylogenetic (natural evolutionary)
relationship between the two groups. DNA
comparisons have shown that green algae are
plants'closest living relatives. In addition, other lines of
evidence support the hypothesis that land plants
evolved from ancestral green algae used the same
type of chlorophyll and accessory pigments in
photosynthesis as do land plants. This would not be
true of red and brown algae. Green algae store food as
starch, as do land plants and have cell walls made of
cellulose, similar in composition to those of land
plants. Again, the good storage and cell wall molecules
of red and brown algae are different.
Paragraph 2: Today green algae live mainly in
freshwater, suggesting that their early evolutionary
history may have occurred in freshwater habitats. If so,the green algae would have been subjected to
environmental pressures that resulted in adaptations
that enhanced their potential to give rise to
land-dwelling or organisms.
2. What can be inferred from paragraph 3 about
ancient green algae?
A.They lived in a generally wet environment that was
sometimes dry
B.They adapted better to changes in water
temperature than did to other changes in the
environment.
C.They inhabited areas that were close to the ocean.
D.They had lived primarily on land
3. The word “desolate”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. dusty
B. hardened
C. deserted
D. dried out
4. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Terrestrial plants had the advantages of not having
rivals and having easy access to photosynthetic
material
B.The abundance of photosynthetic material made life
on land easierfor pioneering plants
C.Once plants had eliminated their competitors and
their predators, their evolutionary process proceeded
smoothly.
D.Plant evolution eliminated competitors and made
the process of photosynthesis more efficient.
5. According to paragraph 4, which of the following
is true about the terrestrial world at the time it was
colonized by plants?
A. it was exposed to high leve ls of solar radiation
B. it contained a limited supply of carbon dioxide
C. it had developed 400million years earlier
D. it lacked the presence of any organisms
Paragraph 3: The environmental conditions of
freshwater habitats, unlike those of ocean habitats,
are highly variable. Water temperature can fluctuate
seasonally or even daily and changing level of rainfall
can lead to fluctuations in the concentration of
chemical in the water or even to period in which the
aquatic habitat dries up. Ancient fresh water green
algae must have evolved features that enable them to
withstand extremes of temperature and periods of
dryness. These adaptations served their descendant
well as they invaded land.
Paragraph 4: The terrestrial world is green now, but
it did not start out that way. When plants first made
the transition ashore more than 400 million years ago,the land was barren and desolate , inhospitable to life.
From a plant's evolutionary view point, however, it
was also a land of opportunity, free of competitors
and predators and full of carbon dioxide and sunlight
(the raw materials for photosynthesis, which are
present in far higher concentrations in air than in
water).
So once natural selection had shaped the
adaptations that helped plants overcome the
obstacles to terrestrial living, plants prospered and
diversified.
6. What purpose does paragraph 5 serve in the
larger discussion of the origins of terrestrial plants?
A.To emphasize how long it took for ancestral plants to
adjust to life on land
B.To disprove the argument that land plants adapted
easily to their new terrestrial environment
C.To explain how plant colonization changed the
physical environment of the terrestrial world
D.To describe how ancestral plants solved the
problems they confirmed in colonizing
Paragraph 5: When plants pioneered the land, they
faced a range of challenges posed by terrestrial
environments. On land, the supportive buoyancy of
water is missing, the plant is no longer bathed in a
nutrient solution, and air tends to dry things out.
These conditions favored the evolution of the
structures that support the body, vessels that
transport water and nutrients to all parts of plant, and
structures that conserve water. The resulting
adaptations to dry land include some structural
features that arose early in plant evolution; now these
features are common to virtually all land plant. They
include roots or root like structures, a waxy cuticle
that covers the surfaces of leaves and stems and limits
the evaporation of water, and pores called stomata in
leaves and stems that allow gas exchange but close
when water is scarce, thus reducing water loss. Other
adaptations occurred later in the transition to
terrestrial life and now wide spread but not universal
among plants. These include conducting vessels that
transport water and minerals upward from the roots
and that move the photosynthetic products from the
leavesto the rest of the plant body and the stiffening
substance lignin, which support the plant body,
helping it expose maximum surface area to sunlight.
7. According to Paragraph 6, The adaptation made
by terrestrial plants had which of the following effect?'
A. Plants developed reproductive strategies usable in
both land and water environment
B. the plant diversity achieved in water environments
diminished on land
C. seed plants became the dominant species among
plants
D. a greater range of plants was able to develop
8. Which of the following best describes the author's
presentation of the information about land plants？
A.the author provided and overview of the
evolutionary relationships between specific species of
algae and land plants
B. The author discusses the transformation plants
underwent in the process of changing from an aquatic
to a terrestrial environment
C. the author establishes a pattern of similarity
between major land and water pant groups
D. The author presents evidence to support the
hypothesis that plants first fully evolved in water
before finding their way to land
Paragraph 6: These adaptations allowed an
increasing diversity of plant forms to exploit dry land.
Life on land, however, also required new methods of
transporting sperm to eggs. Unlike aquatic and marine
forms, land plants cannot always rely on water
currents to carry their sex cells and disperse their
fertilized eggs. So the most successful groups of land
plants are those that evolved methods of fertilized sex
cell dispersal that are independent of water and
structures that protest developing embryos from
drying out. Protected embryos and waterless dispersal
of sex cells were achieved with the origin of seed
plants and the key evolutionary innovations that they
introduced: pollen, seeds, and later, flowers and fruits.
The environmental conditions of freshwater habitats, unlike those of ocean habitats, are highly variable. Water
temperature can fluctuate seasonally or even daily and changing level of rainfall can lead to fluctuations in the
concentration of chemical in the water or even to period in which the aquatic habitat dries up. Ancient fresh
water green algae must have evolved features that enable them to withstand extremes of temperature and
periods of dryness. These adaptations served their descendant well asthey invaded land.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Scientists believe that chemical changes and a thicker exterior, among other things, may have helped ancient algae
overcome the conditions in their environment.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
In moving from water to land, ancestral plants overcame many obstacles in order to survive. Answer choices
A.Neither brown nor red algae are likely to be ancestors of plants because of their difference in pigmentation
B.The instability of freshwater habitats caused marine algae to develop adaptations to their harsh environment.
C..
The colonization of land by plants was a major revolution in the history of Earth.
D.Terrestrial plants adjusted to life on land by undergoing structural changes that enabled them to support
themselves, resist drying, and exchange gases.
E.To colonize new terrestrial habitats, plants needed to create a way of reproducing without water.
F.Once plants had overcome the challenges posed by terrestrial life, they prospered by becoming less diverse.
TPO26
TPO26-1 Energy and the Industrial Revolution
1.Why does the author provide the information that
“Great Britain had large amounts of coal”? A To reject
the claim that Britain was facing an energy shortage in
the eighteenth century
B.To explain why coal rather than other energy
resources became the primary source of heat for
homes and industries in eighteenth-century Britain
C.To indicate that Britain's energy shortage was not
the result of a lack of fuel
D.To explain why coal mining became an important
industry in nineteenth-century
2.What was “the problem of energy" that had to be
solved to make the Industrial Revolution of the
eighteenth century possible?
A.Water and wind could not be used efficiently.
B.There was no efficient way to power machinery.
C.Steam engines required large amounts of coal,
which was in short supply.
D.Neither humans nor animals were strong enough to
provide the power required for industrial application.
For years historians have sought to identify crucial
elements in the eighteenth-century rise in industry,
technology, and economic power known as the
Industrial Revolution, and many give prominence tothe problem of energy . Until the eighteenth century,
people relied on energy derived from plants as well as
animal and human muscle to provide power. Increased
efficiency in the use of water and wind helped with
such tasks as pumping, milling, or sailing. However, by
the eighteenth century, Great Britain in particular was
experiencing an energy shortage. Wood, the primary
source of heat for homes and industries and also used
in the iron industry as processed charcoal, wasdiminishing in supply. Great Britain had large
amounts of coal; however, there were not yet efficient
means by which to produce mechanical energy or to
power machinery. This was to occur with progress in
the development of the steam engine.
3.Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 2 as a development in cotton mills brought
about by Watt's steam engine?
A.The importing of huge quantities of raw cotton by
Britain
B.Increased mechanization
C.More possibilities for mill location
D.Smaller mills
4.The phrase “apparent in” in the passage is closest in
meaning to A clearly seen in
B.aided by
C.associated with
D.followed by
5.What is the role of paragraph 2 in the passage as a
whole? A It explains how by increasing the supply of
raw materials from other countries, British industries
were able to reduce costs and increase production.
B.It explains how the production of mechanical energy
and its benefits spread quickly across countries that
were linked commercially with Great Britain.
C.It demonstrates why developments in a single
industry could not have caused the Industrial
Revolution.
D.It illustrates why historians have assigned great
importance to the issue of energy in the rise of the
Industrial Revolution.
In the late 1700s James Watt designed an efficient and
commercially viable steam engine that was soon
applied to a variety of industrial uses as it became
cheaper to use. The engine helped solve the problem
of draining coal mines of groundwater and increased
the production of coal needed to power steam
engines elsewhere. A rotary engine attached to the
steam engine enabled shafts to be turned and
machines to be driven, resulting in mills using steam
power to spin and weave cotton. Since the steam
engine was fired by coal, the large mills did not need
to be located by rivers, as had mills that used water-
driven machines. The shift to increased mechanizationin cotton production is apparent in the import of raw
cotton and the sale of cotton goods. Between 1760
and 1850, the amount of raw cotton imported
increased 230 times. Production of British cotton
goods increased sixtyfold, and cotton cloth became
Great Britain's most important product, accounting for
one-half of all exports. The success of the steam
engine resulted in increased demands for coal, andtheconsequent increase in coal production was made
possible as the steam-powered pumps drained water
from the ever-deeper coal seams found below the
water table.
6.According to paragraph 3, why was the use of coke
important for the iron industry? A It helped make
wood into charcoal.
B.It reduced the dependency on steam-powered
machines used for the production of iron.
C.It replaced charcoal in the production of raw and
refined iron.
D.It powered the machines used to extract coal in coal
mines.
The availability of steam power and the demands for
new machines facilitated the transformation of the
iron industry. Charcoal, made from wood and thus in
limited supply, was replaced with coal-derived coke
(substance left after coal is heated) as steam-driven
bellows came into use for producing of raw iron.
Impurities were burnt away with the use of coke,
producing a high-quality refined iron. Reduced cost
was also instrumental in developing steam-powered
rolling mills capable of producing finished iron of
various shapes and sizes. The resulting boom in the
iron industry expanded the annual iron output by
more than 170 times between 1740 and 1840, and by
the 1850s Great Britain was producing more tons of
iron than the rest of the world combined. The
developments in the iron industry were in part a
response to the demand for more machines and the
ever-widening use of higher-quality iron in other
industries.
7.Paragraph 4 implies which of the following about the
transformation in rail transportation? A Because
railway construction employed mostly rural laborers,
unemployment increased among urban workers.
B.It resulted in more trade within the country, but less
trade with markets that could be reached only by
ocean shipping.
C.It made shipping freight overland to distant markets
less expensive.
D.It resulted in higher wages for factory workers.
8.The phrase “accustomed to" in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.in need of
B.used to
C.tired of
D.encouraged by
Steam power and iron combined to revolutionize
transport, which in turn had further implications.
Improvements in road construction and sailing had
occurred, but shipping heavy freight over land
remained expensive, even with the use of rivers and
canals wherever possible. Parallel rails had long been
used in mining operations to move bigger loads, but
horses were still the primary source of power.
However, the arrival of the steam engine initiated a
complete transformation in rail transportation,
entrenching and expanding the Industrial Revolution.
As transportation improved, distant and larger
markets within the nation could be reached, thereby
encouraging the development of larger factories to
keep pace with increasing sales. Greater productivity
and rising demands provided entrepreneurs with
profits that could be reinvested to take advantage of
new technologies to further expand capacity, or to
seek alternative investment opportunities. Also, the
availability of jobs in railway construction attractedmany rural laborers accustomed to seasonal and
temporary employment. When the work was
completed, many moved to other construction jobs or
to factory work in cities and towns, where they
became part of an expanding working class.
362Steam power and iron combined to revolutionize transport, which in turn had further implications. Improvements
in road construction and sailing had occurred, but shipping heavy freight over land remained expensive, even with
the use of rivers and canals wherever possible. Parallel rails had long been used in mining operations to move
bigger loads, but horses were still the primary source of power. However, the arrival of the steam engine
initiated a complete transformation in rail transportation, entrenching and expanding the Industrial Revolution.
As transportation improved, distant and larger markets within the nation could be reached, thereby encouraging
the development of larger factories to keep pace with increasing sales. Greater productivity and rising demands
provided entrepreneurs with profits that could be reinvested to take advantage of new technologies to further
expand capacity, or to seek alternative investment opportunities. Also, the availability of jobs in railway
construction attracted many rural laborers accustomed to seasonal and temporary employment. When the work
was completed, many moved to other construction jobs or to factory work in cities and towns, where they
became part of an expanding working class.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage. The first steam-powered
locomotives were slow but they rapidly improved in speed and carrying capacity.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The coming of the Industrial Revolution in
eighteenth-century Britain depended on the development of the steam engine to power machinery.
A. For years, historians disregarded the issue of energy as a major element in the rise of the Industrial Revolution
and focused instead on technological developments and increased production.
B. By 1850, the use of steam power in Britain's mills, mines, and iron industry made Britain a world leader in the
production of cotton cloth and iron.
C. The introduction and growth of steam-powered rail transport was a major factor in Britain's economic
expansion during the Industrial Revolution.
D. Once the basic infrastructure was in place, the Industrial Revolution fueled itself with enlarging markets
requiring ever more expansion of factories and workforce.
E. An expansion of the Industrial Revolution outside Great Britain occurred when British industries began to
import raw cotton and high-quality iron.
F. By the end of the 1800s, railway construction attracted so many laborers that factories could not find enough
workers to keep up with increasing sales.
TPO26-2 Survival of Plants and Animals in Desert Conditions
1.According to paragraph 1, water provides all of the
following essential functions for plants EXCEPT
A.improving plants' ability to absorb sunlight
B.preventing plants from becoming overheated
C.transporting nutrients
D.serving as a raw material for photosynthesis
2.Paragraph 3 suggests that during a dry year
ephemerals
A.produce even more seeds than in a wet year
B.do not sprout from their seeds
C.bloom much later than in a wet year
D.are more plentiful than perennials
The harsh conditions in deserts are intolerable for
most plants and animals. Despite these conditions,
however, many varieties of plants and animals have
adapted to deserts in a number of ways. Most plant
tissues die if their water content falls too low: the
nutrients that feed plants are transmitted by water;
water is a raw material in the vital process of
photosynthesis; and water regulates the temperature
of a plant by its ability to absorb heat and because
water vapor lost to the atmosphere through the leaves
helps to lower plant temperatures. Water controls the
volume of plant matter produced. The distribution of
plants within different areas of desert is also
controlled by water. Some areas, because of their soil
texture, topographical position, or distance from rivers
or groundwater, have virtually no water available to
plants, whereas others do.
The nature of plant life in deserts is also highly
dependent on the fact that they have to adapt to the
prevailing aridity. There are two general classes of
vegetation: long-lived perennials, which may be
succulent (water-storing) and are often dwarfed and
woody, and annuals or ephemerals, which have a
short life cycle and may form a fairly dense stand
immediately after rain.
The ephemeral plants evade drought. Given a year of
favorable precipitation, such plants will developvigorously and produce large numbers of flowers and
fruit. This replenishes the seed content of the desert
soil. The seeds then lie dormant until the next wet
year, when the desert blooms again.
3.The word “countering” in the passage is closest in
meaning to A eliminating
B.making use of
C.acting against
D.experiencing
4.According to paragraph 4, some desert plants with
root systems that are extraordinarily well developed
have
A.relatively little growth aboveground
B.very leafy aboveground structures
C.non woody plant tissue resistant to wilting
D.water stored within their roots
5.What do “the date palm, tamarisk, and mesquite"
have in common? A They are always found together.
B.They depend on surface water provided by streams,
springs, and lakes.
C.They are phreatophytes.
D.Their roots are capable of breaking through hard
soils
The perennial vegetation adjusts to the aridity by
means of various avoidance mechanisms. Most desert
plants are probably best classified as xerophytes. They
possess drought-resisting adaptations: loss of water
through the leaves is reduced by means of dense hairs
covering waxy leaf surfaces, by the closure of pores
during the hottest times to reduce water loss, and by
the rolling up or shedding of leaves at the beginning of
the dry season. Some xerophytes, the succulents
(including cacti), store water in their structures.
Another way of countering drought is to have a
limited amount of mass above ground and to have
extensive root networks below ground. It is not
unusual for the roots of some desert perennials to
extend downward more than ten meters. Some plants
are woody in type —an adaptation designed to
prevent collapse of the plant tissue when water stress
produces wilting. Another class of desert plant is the
phreatophyte. These have adapted to the
environment by the development of long taproots
that penetrate downward until they approach theassured water supply provided by groundwater.
Among these plants are the date palm, tamarisk, and
mesquite . They commonly grow near stream channels,
springs, or on the margins of lakes.
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.One way animals escape is by entering a state of
extended dormancy, known as aestivation, during the
hottest and driest times of year.
B.Animals can escape without using direct action, or
aestivation, simply by reducing their metabolic rate
and body temperature.
C.The actions that an animal uses to escape are known
as aestivation, which sometimes involves a reduction
in metabolic rate or body temperature.
D.When the weather is especially hot and dry, an
animal may suffer from a condition known as
aestivation, at which point the animal needs to
escape.
7.It can be inferred from paragraph 6 that all of the
places desert animals retreat to
A.provide shade from the sun
B.sometimes become crowded
C.are places where supplies of food are plentiful
D.leave the animals vulnerable to predators
8.According to paragraph 7, what special adaptation
helps the ostrich cope with hot desert conditions?
A.Each of its feathers is very short and dense.
B.Its
wings produce only lateral air movement when
flapping.
C.Its feathers are very thickly set on both its
back and its wings.
D.It can make its feathers stand up
on its back.
Animals also have to adapt to desert conditions, and
they may do it through two forms of behavioral
adaptation: they either escape or retreat. Escape
involves such actions as aestivation, a condition of
prolonged dormancy, or torpor, during which animals
reduce their metabolic rate and body temperature
during the hot season or during very dry spells.
Seasonal migration is another form of escape,
especially for large mammals or birds. The term
retreat is applied to the short-term escape behavior of
desert animals, and it usually assumes the pattern of a
daily rhythm. Birds shelter in nests, rock overhangs,
trees, and dense shrubs to avoid the hottest hours of
the day, while mammals like the kangaroo rat burrow
underground.
Some animals have behavioral, physiological, and
morphological (structural) adaptations that enable
them to withstand extreme conditions. For example,
the ostrich has plumage that is so constructed that the
feathers are long but not too dense. When conditions
are hot, the ostrich erects them on its back, thus
increasing the thickness of the barrier between solar
radiation and the skin. The sparse distribution of the
feathers, however, also allows considerable lateral air
movement over the skin surface, thereby permitting
further heat loss by convection. Furthermore, the
birds orient themselves carefully with regard to the
Sun and gently flap their wings to increase convection
cooling.
366The harsh conditions in deserts are intolerable for most plants and animals. Despite these conditions, however,
many varieties of plants and animals have adapted to deserts in a number of ways. Most plant tissues die if their
water content falls too low: the nutrients that feed plants are transmitted by water; water is a raw material in the
vital process of photosynthesis; and water regulates the temperature of a plant by its ability to absorb heat and
because water vapor lost to the atmosphere through the leaves helps to lower plant temperatures. Water
controls the volume of plant matter produced. The distribution of plants within different areas of desert is also
controlled by water. Some areas, because of their soil texture, topographical position, or distance from rivers or
groundwater, have virtually no water available to plants, whereas others do. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? For this reason, the total amount of plant material in a desert is often 100 times
less than the amount of plant material in an equivalent area of temperate forest.
10.Directions: Select from the seven phrases below the two phrases that correctly characterize special adaptations
found primarily in desert annuals and the three phrases that correctly characterize special adaptations found
primarily in desert perennials. Select each phrase you select in the appropriate column of the table. This question
is worth 3 points.
A. Woody structures
B. Explosive growth in wet years
C. Long, thin, shallow roots
D. Storage of water in plant tissue
E. Minimization of the amount of water used for photosynthesis
F. Short life cycle
G. Leaves designed to minimize water loss
TPO26-3 Sumer and the First Cities of the Ancient Near East
1.Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 1 as a disadvantage of the Mesopotamian
plain?
A.There was not very much rainfall for most of the
year.
B.Melting snow caused flooding every year.
C.The silt deposited by rivers damaged crops.
D.Timber, stone and metals were not readily available.
1.According to paragraph 1, which of the following
made it possible for an elite to emerge?
A.New crops were developed that were better suited
to conditions on the Mesopotamian plain.
B.The richest individuals managed to gain control of
the most valuable cropland.
C.Control over the few available natural resources
made some people four to five times richer than
everyone else.
D.The building of canals to increase agricultural output
required organization.
The earliest of the city states of the ancient Near East
appeared at the southern end of the Mesopotamian
plain, the area between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers
in what is now Iraq. It was here that the civilization
known as Sumer emerged in its earliest form in the
fifth millennium. At first sight, the plain did not appear
to be a likely home for a civilization. There were few
natural resources, no timber, stone, or metals. Rainfall
was limited, and what water there was rushed across
the plain in the annual flood of melted snow. As the
plain fell only 20 meters in 500 kilometers, the beds of
the rivers shifted constantly. It was this that made the
organization of irrigation, particularly the building of
canals to channel and preserve the water, essential.
Once this was done and the silt carried down by the
rivers was planted, the rewards were rich: four to five
times what rain-fed earth would produce. It was these
conditions that allowed an elite to emerge, probablyas an organizing class, and to sustain itself through the
control of surplus crops.
3.According to paragraph 2, Eridu and Uruk are
examples of urban settlements that
A.lacked the features usually found in other early
urban settlements
B.developed around religious buildings
C.grew much more rapidly than most of the urban
settlements found in Sumer
D.were mysteriously destroyed and abandoned
4.The word “sovereign" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.counselor
B.master
C.defender
D.creator
It is difficult to isolate the factors that led to the next
development—the emergence of urban settlements.
The earliest, that of Eridu, about 4500 B.C.E., and Uruk,
a thousand years later, center on impressive temple
complexes built of mud brick. In some way, the elite
had associated themselves with the power of the gods.
Uruk, for instance, had two patron gods—Anu, the
god of the sky and sovereign of all other gods, and
Inanna, a goddess of love and war—and there were
others, patrons of different cities. Human beings were
at their mercy. The biblical story of the Flood may
originate in Sumer. In the earliest version, the gods
destroy the human race because its clamor had been
so disturbing to them.
5.According to paragraph 3, which of the following led
to the appearance of writing? A An increasingly
sophisticated administrative system
B.Coordination between secular and religious leaders
C.The large volume of trade, particularly imports
D.A rapidly expanding and changing population
It used to be believed that before 3000 B.C.E. the
political and economic life of the cities was centered
on their temples, but it now seems probable that the
cities had secular rulers from earliest times. Within
the city lived administrators, craftspeople, and
merchants. (Trading was important, as so many raw
materials, the semiprecious stones for the decoration
of the temples, timbers for roofs, and all metals, had
to be imported.) An increasingly sophisticated system
of administration led in about 3300 B.C.E. to the
appearance of writing. The earliest script was based
on logograms, with a symbol being used to express a
whole word. The logograms were incised on damp clay
tablets with a stylus with a wedge shape at its end.
(The Romans called the shape cuneus and this gives
the script its name of cuneiform.) Two thousand
logograms have been recorded from these early
centuries of writing. A more economical approach was
to use a sign to express not a whole word but a single
syllable. (To take an example: the Sumerian word for "
head” was “sag.” Whenever a word including a syllable
in which the sound “sag” was to be written, the sign
for “sag" could be used to express that syllable with
the remaining syllables of the word expressed by
other signs.) By 2300 B.C.E. the number of signs
required had been reduced to 600, and the range of
words that could be expressed had widened. Texts
dealing with economic matters predominated, as they
always had done; but at this point works of theology,
literature, history, and law also appeared.
5.According to paragraph 4, the earliest wheels
probably
A.were first developed in areas outside Mesopotamia
B.were used to make pottery
C.appeared on boxlike sledges
D.were used to transport goods between cities
7.The word “engraved” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.carved
B.produced
C.dated
D.discovered
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Also around 3000 B.C.E., it was discovered that
mixing copper, known from about 3500 B.C.E., with tin
would create a much harder metal known as bronze.
B.Although copper had been known since 3500 B.C.E
in Mesopotamia, the discovery of bronze did not occur
until around 3000 B.C.E.
C.Another major development around 3000 B.C.E. was
the discovery that copper could be mixed with a much
harder metal known as tin.
D.The development of bronze by mixing copper and
tin probably occurred around 3000 B.C.E. but may
have happened as early as 3500 B.C.E.Other innovations of the late fourth millennium
include the wheel, probably developed first as a more
efficient way of making pottery and then transferredto transport. A tablet engraved about 3000 B.C.E.
provides the earliest known example from Sumer, a
roofed boxlike sledge mounted on four solid wheels. A
major development was the discovery, again about
3000 B.C.E., that if copper, which had been known in
Mesopotamia since about 3500 B.C.E., was mixed
with tin, a much harder metal, bronze, would result.
Although copper and stone tools continued to be used,
bronze was far more successful in creating sharp
edges that could be used as anything from saws and
scythes to weapons. The period from 3000 to 1000
B.C.E., when the use of bronze became widespread, is
normally referred to as the Bronze Age.
371It used to be believed that before 3000 B.C.E. the political and economic life of the cities was centered on their
temples, but it now seems probable that the cities had secular rulers from earliest times. Within the city lived
administrators, craftspeople, and merchants. (Trading was important, as so many raw materials, the semiprecious
stones for the decoration of the temples, timbers for roofs, and all metals, had to be imported.) An increasingly
sophisticated system of administration led in about 3300 B.C.E. to the appearance of writing. The earliest script
was based on logograms, with a symbol being used to express a whole word. The logograms were incised on
damp clay tablets with a stylus with a wedge shape at its end. (The Romans called the shape cuneus and this gives
the script its name of cuneiform.) Two thousand logograms have been recorded from these early centuries of
writing. A more economical approach was to use a sign to express not a whole word but a single syllable. (To take
an example: the Sumerian word for " head” was “sag.” Whenever a word including a syllable in which the sound
“sag” was to be written, the sign for “sag" could be used to express that syllable with the remaining syllables of
the word expressed by other signs.) By 2300 B.C.E. the number of signs required had been reduced to 600, and
the range of words that could be expressed had widened. Texts dealing with economic matters predominated, as
they always had done; but at this point works of theology, literature, history, and law also appeared.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? City life was diverse, and the population was engaged in a variety of occupations.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minorideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Irrigation made it possible for the civilization known as
Sumer to arise on the Mesopotamian plain in the fifth millennium B.C.E.
A. The scarcity of natural resources on the plain made it necessary for a powerful elite to emerge and take charge
of trade and imports.
B. Priests were powerful figures in the ancient civilization and controlled the political and economic life of the
cities.
C. The economy of each city was based on a craft such as pottery or metal working, and the city of Eridu was
known for its saws, scythes and weapons.
D. The earliest city states had one or more patron gods and were built around central temple complexes.
E. Writing appeared in the form of logograms and later developed into a system using signs to represent syllables
rather than whole words.
F. The development of the wheel and the creation of bronze were important innovations in Sumer
TPO27
TPO27-1 Crafts in the Ancient Near East
1.According to paragraph 1, all of the following are
true of the ancient settlement at Uruk EXCEPT
A.It was a permanent settlement.
B.It was self-sufficient.
C.It was one of a group of other larger settlements.
D.It had easy access to the land where its crops were
grown.
Some of the earliest human civilizations arose in
southern Mesopotamia, in what is now southern Iraq,
in the fourth millennium B.C.E. In the second half of
the millennium, in the south around the city of Uruk,
there was an enormous escalation in the area
occupied by permanent settlements. A large part of
that increase took place in Uruk itself, which became a
real urban center surrounded by a set of secondary
settlements. While population estimates are
notoriously unreliable, scholars assume that Uruk
inhabitants were able to support themselves from the
agricultural production of the field surrounding the
city, which could be reached with a daily commute.
But Uruk's dominant size in the entire region, far
surpassing that of other settlements, indicates that it
was a regional center and a true city. Indeed, it was
the first city in human history.
2.The word “intact” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.unsold
B.unused
C.undamaged
D.unpainted
3.According to paragraph 2, which of the following
best describes the beveled-rim bowls from the Eanna
Archaeological site at Uruk.
A.They were discarded because they became
unpopular.
B.They varied greatly in shape and decoration.
C.They were each individually styled.
D.They were made in only a few sizes.
4.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 2 about craft production in the Uruk period?
A.Specialists in nonagricultural tasks obtained a higher
status than those engaged in agricultural production.
B.People not needed for farming could perform other
more specialized activities.
C.Ancient crafts were beginning to be produced for
both utilitarian and decorative purposes.
D.Pottery making was the only known during the
fourth millennium.
5.The word “interpreted” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.documented
B.debated
C.displayed
D.understood
The vast majority of its population remained active in
agriculture, even those people living within the city
itself. But a small segment of the urban society started
to specialize in nonagricultural tasks as a result of the
city's role as a regional center. Within the productive
sector, there was a growth of a variety of specialist
craftspeople. Early in the Uruk period, the use of
undecorated utilitarian pottery was probably the
result of specialized mass production. In an early
fourth-millennium level of the Eanna archaeological
site at Uruk, a pottery style appears that is most
characteristic of this process, the so-called
beveled-rim bowl. It is a rather shallow bowl that was
crudely made in a mold; hence, in only a limited
number of standard sizes. For some unknown reason,many were discarded, often still intact , and thousands
have been found all over the Near East. The
beveled-rim bowl is one of the most telling diagnostic
finds for identifying an Uruk-period site. Of
importance is the fact that it was produced rapidly in
large amounts, most likely by specialists in a central
location.
A.variety of documentation indicates that certain
goods, once made by a family member as one of many
duties, were later made by skilled artisans. Certain
images depict groups of people, most likely women,
involved in weaving textiles, an activity we know from
later third-millennium texts to have been vital in the
economy and to have been centrally administered.
Also, a specialized metal-producing workshop may
have been excavated in a small area at Uruk. It
contained a number of channels lined by a sequence
of holes, about 50 centimeters deep, all showing burnmarks and filled with ashes. This has been interpreted
as the remains of a workshop where molten metal
was scooped up from the channel and poured into
molds in the holes. Some type of mass production by
specialists were involved here.
6.The word “legible” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.printable
B.enjoyable
C.recognizable
D.available
7.Paragraph 4 suggests which of the following about
the significances of Mesopotamian cylinder seals?
A.They were designed more for home than for legal
use.
B.They demonstrate that their creators were
professionals.
C.They were the first example of seals made from
materials other than stone.
D.They were the first example of carved seals.
8.According to paragraph 4, one of the artistic
achievements of the late Uruk culture was
A.Its sophisticated sculpture and relief carving
B.Its architecturally complex monuments
C.Its invention of stamp seals carved from stone
D.Its use of highly refined glassy stoneware
Objects themselves suggest that they were the work
of skilled professionals. In the late Uruk
period(3500-3100 B.C.E.), there first appeared a type
of object that remained characteristic for
Mesopotamia throughout its entire history: the
cylinder seal. This was a small cylinder, usually no
more than 3 centimeters high and 2 centimeters in
diameter, of shell, bone, faience (a glassy type of
stoneware), or various types of stones, on which a
scene was carved into the surface. When rolled over a
soft material----primarily the clay of bullae (round
seals), tablets, or clay lumps attached to boxes, jars, or
door bolts----the scene would appear in relief, easilylegible. The technological knowledge needed to
carved it was far superior to that for stamp seals,
which had happened in the early Neolithic period
(approximately 10,000-5000 B.C.E.). From the first
appearance of cylinder seals, the carved scenes could
be highly elaborate and refined, indicating the work of
specialist stone-cutters. Similarly, the late Uruk period
shows the first monumental art, relief, and statuary in
the round, made with a degree of mastery that only a
professional could have produced.
375Objects themselves suggest that they were the work of skilled professionals. In the late Uruk period(3500-3100
B.C.E.), there first appeared a type of object that remained characteristic for Mesopotamia throughout its entire
history: the cylinder seal. This was a small cylinder, usually no more than 3 centimeters high and 2 centimeters in
diameter, of shell, bone, faience (a glassy type of stoneware), or various types of stones, on which a scene was
carved into the surface. When rolled over a soft material----primarily the clay of bullae (round seals), tablets, or
clay lumps attached to boxes, jars, or door bolts----the scene would appear in relief, easily legible. The
technological knowledge needed to carved it was far superior to that for stamp seals, which had happened in the
early Neolithic period (approximately 10,000-5000 B.C.E.). From the first appearance of cylinder seals, the
carved scenes could be highly elaborate and refined, indicating the work of specialist stone-cutters. Similarly, the
late Uruk period shows the first monumental art, relief, and statuary in the round, made with a degree of mastery
that only a professional could have produced.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? When viewed on the curved surface of the cylinder, the image looked distorted,
but the carved image served only as a mold.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Uruk, located in ancient Mesopotamia, flourished in
the fourth millennium B.C.E. and was the first city in human history.
A. A variety of evidence indicates that Uruk, while it supported itself primarily by agriculture, also had specialized
craft workers.
B. Cylinder seals from the late Uruk period are far superior to the stamp earlier Neolithic period.
C. The monumental sculptures of Uruk were made by the specialist stone cutters who also produced small-scale
relief scenes on shell, bone and faience.
D. Archaeological evidence from across the Near East indicates that Uruk was a center for the production and
export of highly decorated pottery made by craft specialists in private homes.
E. The large number, standardized sizes, and simple molded construction of a type of pottery produced in Uruk
demonstrate specialized, centrally organized mass production.
F. The carved designs on cylinder seals produced in Uruk are of such technical and artistic excellence that they
could only have been produced by professional artisans.
TPO27-2 The Formation of Volcanic Islands
1.The author mentions “spreading ridges”,
“subduction zones”, and “transform faults” in order to
A.illustrate that the boundaries of tectonic plates are
neat, thin lines
B.explain why some tectonic plates carry islands or
continents while others form the seafloor
C.explain the complex nature of the edges of tectonic
plates
D.provide examples of areas of tectonic plates where
little geologic action occurs
2.Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information
A.Volcanic activity is responsible for the formation of
the Pacific seafloor in the interior of the Pacific Plate.
B.Many volcanoes in the Pacific Ocean are no longer
active and have become islands that support coral.
C.There are many islands in the Pacific Ocean that
originated as volcanoes in the interior of the Pacific
Plate.
D.The map of the Pacific Ocean reveals fewer volcanic
islands than there truly are because many are no
longer active and some are completely overgrown
with coral.
Earth's surface is not made up of a single sheet of rock
that forms a crust but rather a number of “tectonic
plates” that fit closely, like the pieces of a giant jigsaw
puzzle. Some plates carry islands or continents others
form the seafloor. All are slowly moving because the
plates float on a denser semi-liquid mantle, the layer
between the crust and Earth's core. The plates have
edges that are spreading ridges (where two plates are
moving apart and new seafloor is being created),
subduction zones (where two plates collide and one
plunges beneath the other), or transform faults(where two plates neither converge nor diverge but
merely move past one another). It is at the boundaries
between plates that most of Earth's volcanism and
earthquake activity occur.
Generally speaking, the interiors of plates are
geologically uneventful. However, there are exceptions.
A glance at a map of the Pacific Ocean reveals that
there are many islands far out at sea that are actually
volcanoes----many no longer active, some overgrown
with coral----that originated from activity at points in
the interior of the Pacific Plate that forms the Pacific
seafloor.
3.The word “instructive” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.clear
B.detailed
C.informative
D.familiar
4.The word “eroded” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.worn down
B.scattered
C.developed
D.deserted
5.In paragraph 3, what is the relationship between the
scientific contribution of James Daly and Tuzo Wilson?
A.Wilson provided an explanation for the observations
made by Daly.
B.Wilson challenged the theory proposed by Daly.
C.Wilson found numerous examples of island chains
that supported Daly's theory.
D.Wilson popularized the explanation of volcanic
island formation formulated by Daly.
6.Why does the author provide the information that
“the dating of lavas in the Hawaii (and other) chains
showed that their ages increase away from the
presently active volcano”?
A.To point out differences between the Hawaii island
chain and other volcanic island chains
B.To question the idea that all the islands in an island
chain have been formed by volcanic activity
C.To explain why Wilson hypothesis was initially
difficult to accept
D.To provide evidence in support of Daly's and
Wilson's ideas about how the Hawaii islands were
formed
How can volcanic activity occur so far from a plate
boundary? The Hawaiian Islands provide a very
instructive answer.
Like many other island groups, they
form a chain. The Hawaiian Islands Chain extends
northwest from the island of Hawaii. In the 1840s
American geologist James Daly observed that the
different Hawaii islands seem to share a similargeologic evolution but are progressively more eroded ,
and therefore probable older, toward the northwest.
Then in 1963, in the early days of the development of
the theory of plate tectonics. Canadian geophysicist
Tuzo Wilson realized that this age progression could
result if the islands were formed on a surface plate
moving over a fixed volcanic source in the interior.
Wilson suggested that the long chain of volcanoes
stretching northwest from Hawaii is simply the surface
expression of a long-lived volcanic source located
beneath the tectonic plate in the mantle. Today's most
northwest island would have been the first to form.
They as the plate moved slowly northwest, new
volcanic islands would have forms as the plate moved
over the volcanic source. The most recent island,
Hawaii, would be at the end of the chain and is now
over the volcanic source.
Although this idea was not immediately accepted, the
dating of lavas in the Hawaii (and other) chains
showed that their ages increase away from the
presently active volcano, just as Daly had suggested.
Wilson's analysis of these data is now a central part of
plate tectonics. Most volcanoes that occur in the
interiors of plates are believed to be produced by
mantle plumes, columns of molten rock that rise from
deep within the mantle. A volcano remains an active
“hot spot” as long as it is over the plume. The plumes
apparently originate at great depths, perhaps as deep
as the boundary between the core and the mantle,
and many have been active for a very long time. The
oldest volcanoes in the Hawaii hot-spot trail have ages
close to 80 million years. Other islands, including Tahiti
and Easter Islands in the pacific, Reunion and
Mauritius in the India Ocean, and indeed most of the
large islands in the world's oceans, owe their existence
to mantle plumes.
7.What can be inferred about the Pacific Plate from
paragraph 5?
A.The hot spots on the Pacific Plate are much older
than the ones located on the other tectonic plates.
B.Most of the volcanic sources beneath the Pacific
Plate have become extinct.
C.The Pacific Plate has moved a distance equal to the
length of the Hawaiian Island chain in the past 50
million years.
D.The Pacific Plate is located above fewer mantle
plumes than other plates are.
7.According to paragraph 5, why are geologists unable
to trace back the entire geologic of continents from
hot-spot trails?
A.Hot spots have existed for only about 5 percent of
geologic time.
B.Hawaii did not exist 50 millions years ago.
C.Oceanic basins that contained old hot-spot trails
disappeared a long time ago.
D.Hot-spot trails can be reconstructed only for island
chains.
The oceanic volcanic islands and their hot-spot trails
are thus especially useful for geologist because they
record the past locations of the plate over a fixed
source. They therefore permit the reconstruction of
the process of seafloor spreading, and consequently
of the geography of continents and of ocean basins inthe past. For example, given the current position of
the Pacific Plate, Hawaii is above the Pacific Ocean hot
spot. So the position of The Pacific Plate 50 million
years ago can be determined by moving it such that a
50-million-year-old volcano in the hot-spot trail sits at
the location of Hawaii today. However because the
ocean basins really are short-lived features on
geologic times scale, reconstruction the world's
geography by backtracking along the hot-spot trail
works only for the last 5 percent or so of geologic
time.
379How can volcanic activity occur so far from a plate boundary? The Hawaiian Islands provide a very instructive
answer. Like many other island groups, they form a chain. The Hawaiian Islands Chain extends northwest from
the island of Hawaii. In the 1840s American geologist James Daly observed that the different Hawaii islands
seem to share a similar geologic evolution but are progressively more eroded, and therefore probable older,
toward the northwest. Then in 1963, in the early days of the development of the theory of plate tectonics.
Canadian geophysicist Tuzo Wilson realized that this age progression could result if the islands were formed on a
surface plate moving over a fixed volcanic source in the interior. Wilson suggested that the long chain of volcanoes
stretching northwest from Hawaii is simply the surface expression of a long-lived volcanic source located beneath
the tectonic plate in the mantle. Today's most northwest island would have been the first to form. They as the
plate moved slowly northwest, new volcanic islands would have forms as the plate moved over the volcanic source.
The most recent island, Hawaii, would be at the end of the chain and is now over the volcanic source.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? This pattern remained unexplained for a long time.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Although volcanic activity is concentrated on the edge
of tectonic plates, such activity can occur in the interiors of plates as well.
A. Our understanding of islands comes from Daly 's and Wilson 's observations of the Hawaiian Islands, which was
later confirmed by plate-tectonic theory.
B. It has only recently been discovered that tectonic plates are closely fitting rather than loosely constructed, as
geologists previously believed.
C. The hot-spot trails formed by volcanic island chains indicate the positions of tectonic plates as far back as the
present ocean basins have existed.
D. Volcanic island chains such as the Hawaiian Islands form in the interior of a tectonic plate as the plate moves
over a fixed volcanic source in the mantle.
E. Whereas volcanic islands formed by mantle plumes are typically small, most of the world 's largest islands are
formed at the edges of tectonic plates.
F. The Pacific Plate has existed for as long as the Hawaiian Islands have existed, namely for more than 80 million
years.
TPO27-3 Predator Prey Cycles
1.The word “rebound” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.escape
B.recover
C.survive
D.resist
2.Paragraph 2 implies which of the following about
experimental environments in which predators
become extinct?
A.They may yield results that do not accurate predict
changes of populations in the wild.
B.In these environments, the prey species is better
adapted than the predator species.
C.These environments are appropriate only for
studying small populations of predators and prey.
D.They are unrealistic because some predators are
also the prey of other predators.
3.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraphs 2 and 3 about the small mammals that
experience population cycles?
A.Their population cycles are not affected by
predators.
B.Their predators' populations periodically disappear.
C.They typically undergo ten-year cycles.
D.They have access to places safe from predators.
How do predators affect populations of the prey
animals? The answer is not as simple as might be
thought. Moose reached Isle Royale in Lake Superior
by crossing over winter ice and multiplied freely there
in isolation without predators. When wolves later
reached the island, naturalists widely assumed that
the wolves would play a key role in controlling the
moose population. Careful studies have demonstrated,
however, that this is not the case. The wolves eat
mostly old or diseased animals that would not survive
long anyway. In general, the moose population is
controlled by food availability, disease and other
factors rather than by wolves.
When experimental populations are set up under
simple laboratory conditions, the predator often
exterminates its prey and then becomes extinct itself,
having nothing left to eat. However, if safe areas like
those prey animals have in the wild are provided, the
prey population drops to low level but not extinction.
Low prey population levels then provide inadequate
food for the predators, causing the predator
population to decrease. When this occurs, the preypopulation can rebound . In this situation the predator
and prey population may continue in this cyclical
pattern for some time.
Population cycles are characteristic of small mammals,
and they sometimes appear to be brought about by
predators. Ecologists studying hare populations have
found that the North American snow shoe harefollows a roughly ten-year cycle. Its numbers fall
tenfold to thirty in a typical cycle, and a hundredfold
change can occur. Two factors appear to be generating
the cycle: food plants and predators.
4.According to paragraph 4, all of the following are
true of the food of snowshoe hares EXCEPT
A.The preferred food fore hares consists of willow and
birch twigs.
B.High fiber food is the most nutritious for hares.
C.Depletion of the supply of willow and birch twigs
cause low birth and growth rates.
D.The food supply takes two or three years to recover
after a peak in hare population density.
5.According to paragraph 5, which of the following
statements best characterizes the abundance cycle of
the Canada lynx?
A.It closely follows the cycle the snowshoe hare.
B.When the numbers of lynx fall, the numbers of
snowshoe hares soon decrease.
.
When hare numbers decrease, lynx numbers increase.
D.It is not clearly related to the availability of lynx
food.
6.According to paragraph 6, which of the following
was true of the hare population cycle in Krebs 's
experiment?
A.The effects of providing food while at the same time
introducing predators cancelled each other, so there
was no cycle.
B.The cycle existed when either the food supply was
limited or there were predators.
C.There was a cycle when there were no predators and
food was supplied.
D.If the hares had places to hide from the lynx, the
hare population increased tenfold and then remained
at that level.
The preferred foods of snowshoe hares are willow and
birch twigs. As hare density increases, the quantity of
these twigs decreases, forcing the hares to feed on
low-quality high-fiber food. Lower birth rates, low
juvenile survivorship, and low growth rates follow, so
there is a corresponding decline in hare abundance.
Once the hare population has declined, it takes two to
three year for the quantity of twigs to recover.
A.key predator of the snowshoe hare is the Canada
lynx. The Canada lynx shows a ten-year cycle of
abundance that parallels the abundance cycle of hares.
As hare numbers fall, so do lynx numbers, as their
food supply depleted.
What causes the predator-prey oscillations? Do
increasing number of hares lead to overharvesting of
plants, which in turn results in reduced hare
populations, or do increasing numbers of lynx lead to
overharvesting hares? Field experiments carried out
by Charles Krebs and coworkers in 1992 provide an
answer. Krebs investigated experimental plots in
Canada's Yukon territory that contained hare
populations. When food was added to those plots (no
food effect) and predators were excluded (no predator
effect) from an experimental area, hare numbers
increased tenfold and stayed there—the cycle was lost.
However, the cycle was retained if either of the factors
7.According to paragraph 7, which of the following
statements correctly characterizes the effect of sea
stars on the ecosystem in which they are predators of
bivalves?
A.Bivalve population are kept low, allowing species
that compete with bivalves to survive.
B.The numbers of most species of bivalves are greatly
reduced, leaving the bivalve species that is the
strongest competitor to dominate among the
survivors.
C.Biological diversity begins to decrease because many
bivalve species disappear.
D.Sea stars dominate at first but then die off because
of the depleted food supply.
8.According to paragraph 7, which of the following is
true of the phenomenon of competitor exclusion?
A.It results in more diverse communities.
B.It requires the presence of predators.
C.It affects all competitions equally.
D.It happens only when there is a dominant
competitor.was allowed to operate alone: if predators were
excluded but food was not added (food effect alone),
or if food was added in the presence of predators
(predator effect alone). Thus both factors can affect
the cycle, which, in practice, seems to be generated byconjunction of the two factors.
Predators are an essential factor in maintaining
communities that are rich and diverse in species.
Without predators, the species that is the best
competitor for food, shelter, nesting sites, and other
environmental resources tends to dominate and
exclude the species with which it competes. This
phenomenon is known as “competitor exclusion”.
However, if the community contains a predator of the
strongest competitor species, then the population of
that competitor is controlled. Thus even the less
competitive species are able to survive. For example,
sea stars prey on a variety of bivalve mollusks and
prevent these bivalves from monopolizing habitats on
the sea floor. This opens up space for many other
organisms. When sea stars are removed, species
diversity falls sharply. Therefore, from the stand point
of diversity, it is usually a mistake to eliminate a major
predator from a community.
383Predators are an essential factor in maintaining communities that are rich and diverse in species. Without
predators, the species that is the best competitor for food, shelter, nesting sites, and other environmental
resources tends to dominate and exclude the species with which it competes. This phenomenon is known as
“competitor exclusion”. However, if the community contains a predator of the strongest competitor species, then
the population of that competitor is controlled. Thus even the less competitive species are able to survive. For
example, sea stars prey on a variety of bivalve mollusks and prevent these bivalves from monopolizing habitats on
the sea floor. This opens up space for many other organisms. When sea stars are removed, species diversity falls
sharply. Therefore, from the stand point of diversity, it is usually a mistake to eliminate a major predator from a
community.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
As a result, there are not enough of the strong competitions to monopolize the environment 's resources.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The relationships between predators and prey are
complex.
A. Studies of the interactions between wolves and moose on Isle Royale in Lake Superior reveal that wolf
predation is not the primary factor controlling the moose population.
B. Ecologists are interested in studying predator-prey population cycles because understanding how predators and
prey interact will allow better wildlife management programs.
C. Predators help maintain biological diversity by limiting populations of a dominant competitor species, thereby
preventing that species from excluding others.
D. In predator-prey population cycles, predator populations increase or decrease following similar population
changes in the species they prey on.
E. A species 'population tends to rise and falls in a cycle pattern if the food supply for the population is limited, or
if the population has a major predator.
F. The removal of sea stars reduces the diversity of the community in which they are predators, and is therefore a
bad idea.
TPO28
TPO28-1 Groundwater
1.In paragraph 1, why does the author mention “the
pressure of the overlying rock”?
A.To show how water can be forced deep under
Earth's surface
B.To show why groundwater is more plentiful than
surface freshwater
C.To correct a commonly made error about the
location of groundwater
D.To explain why most groundwater lies near Earth's
surface
Most of the world's potable water----freshwater
suitable for drinking----is accounted for by
groundwater, which is stored in the pores and
fractures in rocks. There is more than 50 times as
much freshwater stored underground than in all the
freshwater rivers and lakes at the surface. Nearly 50
percent of all groundwater is stored in the upper
1,000 meters of Earth. At greater depths within Earth,
the pressure of the overlying rock causes pores and
cracks to close, reducing the space that pore water
can occupy, and almost complete closure occurs at a
depth of about 10 kilometers. The greatest water
storage, therefore, lies near the surface.
Aquifers, Porosity and Permeability
2.The word “extracted” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.used
B.poured
C.removed
D.kept out
3.The word “termed” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.considered
B.called
C.limited to
D.caused by
4.According to paragraph 2, what does porosity
determine?
A.The rate at which the aquifer's water overcomes
resistance to flow
B.The amount of water that the aquifer can hold
C.The likelihood that fractures and joints will occur in
the aquifer
D.The depth underground at which the aquifer lies
Groundwater is stored in a variety of rock types. A
groundwater reservoir from which water can be
extracted is called an aquifer. We can effectively think
of an aquifer as a deposit of water. Extraction of water
depends on two properties of the aquifer: porosity
and permeability. Between sediment grains are spaces
that can be filled with water. This pore space is known
as porosity and is expressed as a percentage of the
total rock volume. Porosity is important for
water-storage capacity, but for water to flow through
rocks, the pore spaces must be connected. The ability
of water, or other fluids, to flow through theinterconnected pore spaces in rocks is termed
permeability. In the intergranular spaces of rocks,
however, fluid must flow around and between grains
in a tortuous path; this winding path causes a
resistance to flow. The rate at which the flowing water
overcomes this resistance is related to the
permeability of rock.
permeability and porosity. The more poorly sorted or
the more tightly compacted a sediment is ,the lower
its porosity and permeability. Sedimentary rocks----the
most common rock type near the surface----are also
the most common reservoirs for water because they
contain the most space that can be filled with water.
Sandstones generally make good aquifers, while
finer-grained mudstones are typically impermeable.
Impermeable rocks are referred to as aquicludes.
Igneous and metamorphic rocks are more compact,
commonly crystalline, and rarely contain spaces
between grains. However, even igneous and
metamorphic rocks may act as groundwater reservoirs
if extensive fracturing occurs in such rocks and if the
fracture system is interconnected.
Sediment sorting
and compaction influence The Water Table
5.The word “coating” in the passage is closest in
meaning to A stream
B.barrier
C.amount
D.layer
6.Paragraph 4 implies which of the following about the
roots of plants?
A.They prevent water from reaching the vadose zone.
B.They mark the boundary between the vadose zone
and the water table
C.They do not typically get their water from the water
table.
D.They help keep the water table from dropping
farther.
The water table is the underground boundary below
which all the cracks and pores are filled with water. In
some cases, the water table reaches Earth's surface,
where it is expressed as rivers, lakes and marshes.
Typically, though, the water table may be tens or
hundreds of meters below the surface. The water
table is not flat but usually follows the contours of the
topography. Above the water table is the vadose zone,
through which rainwater percolates. Water in the
vadose zone drains down to the water table, leavingbehind a thin coating of water on mineral grains. The
vadose zone supplies plant roots near the surface with
water.
7.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information. A
Groundwater only flows out of the ground if the water
table intersects the land surface.
B.If the land surface and the water table intersect,
groundwater can flow underground.
C.Groundwater may be drained if springs occur where
the water table intersects the land surface.
D.Where the water table meets the land surface,
groundwater flows out through surface springs.
8.Paragraph 5 implies which of the following about the
level of the water
A.It may rise or fall from year to year, depending on
annual rainfall.
B.It does not vary in arid regions.
C.It rarely intersects the land surface of most regions.
D.It is unrelated to the rate at which groundwater
flows.
Because the surface of the water table is not flat but
instead rises and falls with topography, groundwater is
affected by gravity in the same fashion as surface
water. Groundwater flows downhill to topographiclows. If the water table intersect the land surface,
groundwater will flow out onto the surface at springs,
whether to be collected there or to subsequently
flow farther along a drainage. Groundwater
commonly collects in stream drainages but may
remain entirely beneath the surface of dry
stream-beds in arid regions. In particularly wet years,
short stretches of an otherwise dry stream-bed may
have flowing water because the water table rises to
intersect the land surface.
The water table is the underground boundary below which all the cracks and pores are filled with water. In some
cases, the water table reaches Earth's surface, where it is expressed as rivers, lakes and marshes. Typically,
though, the water table may be tens or hundreds of meters below the surface. The water table is not flat but
usually follows the contours of the topography. Above the water table is the vadose zone, through which
rainwater percolates. Water in the vadose zone drains down to the water table, leaving behind a thin coating of
water on mineral grains. The vadose zone supplies plant roots near the surface with water.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This is a consequence of the slow rate of movement of the groundwater, which often prevents the water table
from attaining a flat (horizontal) level.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Most of the world's potable water is stored as
groundwater in the pores and fractures of underground rock, much of it at depths of less than 1,000 meters.
A.Sedimentary rock may make poor aquifers because of tightly compacted sediment, which reduces porosity and
permeability.
B. Groundwater reservoirs are characterized by the porosity and permeability of the rock in which they lie, and
these factors vary according to the type of rock.
C. Porosity is a measure of the empty space within rock, while permeability measures the degree to which water
can flow freely through rock.
D. The vadose zone is typically dry because water does not stay in it, but instead percolates down to aquifers
below or drains out through springs and streams.
E. In arid regions, the water tables remain at a constant level far below the surface, preventing stream-beds from
filling up even during wet years.
F. Although the water table usually follows the contours of the land surface, its level may vary from year to year
and may intersect the surface in places.
TPO28-2 Early Saharan Pastoralists
1.According to paragraph 1, what was true of the
Sahara region around 6,000 B.C.? A Much less of it
was desert than is now the case.
B.Most areas that are now grassland were covered by
shallow lakes.
C.It had just undergone a major climatic change.
D.Wild oxen and antelopes lived in separate parts of
the region.
2.The word “albeit” in the passage is closest in
meaning to A usually
B.almost
C.though
D.rather
3.According to paragraph 1, which of the following is
true of all arid regions?
A.They include at least some freshwater lakes.
B.They have similar distributions of plants and
animals.
C.They are greatly affected by changes in the amount
of rain they receive.
D.They have frequent droughts that make it difficult to
manage the wild resources.
The Sahara is a highly diverse, albeit dry, region that
has undergone major climatic changes since 10,000
B.C. As recently as 6,000 B.C. the southern frontier of
the desert was far to the north of where it is now,
while semiarid grassland and shallow freshwater lakes
covered much of what are now arid plains. This was a
landscape where antelope of all kinds
abounded----along with Bos primigenius, a kind of
oxen that has become extinct. The areas that are now
desert were, like all arid regions, very susceptible to
cycles of higher and lower levels of rainfall, resulting in
major, sudden changes in distributions of plants and
animals. The people who hunted the sparse desert
animals responded to drought by managing the wild
resources they hunted and gathered, especially wild
oxen, which had to have regular water supplies to
survive.
4.Paragraph 2 supports which of the following ideas
about wild oxen in the Sahara region after the drought
took hold?
A.They traveled in smaller herds.
B.They were harder for hunters to capture.
C.They tended to be significantly smaller in size.
D.They moved along less predictable routes.
Even before the drought, the Sahara was never well
watered. Both humans and animals were constantly
on the move, in search of food and reliable water
supplies. Under these circumstances, archaeologist
Andrew Smith believes, the small herds of Bos
primigenius in the desert became smaller, more
closely knit breeding units as the drought took hold.
The beasts were more disciplined, so that it was easier
for hunters to predict their habits, and capture
animals at will. At the same time, both cattle and
humans were more confined in their movements,
staying much closer to permanent water supplies for
long periods of time. As a result, cattle and humans
came into close association.
Smith believes that the hunters were well aware of
the more disciplined ways in which their prey behaved.
Instead of following the cattle on their annual
migrations, the hunters began to prevent the herd
from moving from one spot to another. At first, they
controlled the movement of the herd while ensuring
continuance of their meat diet. But soon they also
gained genetic control of the animals, which led to
rapid physical changes in the herd. South African
farmers who maintain herds of wild eland (large
African antelopes with short, twisted horns) report
that the offspring soon diminish in size, unless wild
bulls are introduced constantly from outside. The
same effects of inbreeding may have occurred in
controlled cattle populations, with some additional,
and perhaps unrecognized, advantages. The newly
domesticated animals behaved better, were easier to
control, and may have enjoyed a higher birth rate,
which in turn yielded greater milk supplies. We knowfrom rock paintings deep in the Sahara that the
herders were soon selecting breeding animals to
produce offspring with different horn shapes and hide
colors.
5.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information. A
Regardless of where the first tamed herds came from,
people tried to control them by living in juxtaposition
with them.
B.Regardless of where the first tamed herds came
from, they resulted from the same process of
juxtaposition and control by people who understood
the behavior of wild cattle.
C.People who had an intimate knowledge of the
behavior of wild cattle moved closer together to
cooperate in taming the herd, regardless of where
they found them.
D.The process of taming herds was certainly the same
in southwest Asia, northern Africa, and Europe
because people knew a lot about the behavior of wild
cattle, regardless of where they lived.
6.According to paragraph 5, each of the following was
true about the early Saharan people EXCEPT
A.They had few possessions apart from cattle.
B.After about 5,000 B.C., they lived primarily in caves
that were located deep in the desert.
C.Between the summer and winter seasons, they
moved their herds over long distances.
D.They painted animals and scenes of daily life on the
walls of caves.
7.The word “endeavors” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.methods
B.styles
C.scenes
D.efforts
It is still unclear whether domesticated cattle were
tamed independently in northern Africa or introduced
to the continent from southwest Asia. Whatever the
source of the original tamed herds might have been,
it seems entirely likely that much the same process
of juxtaposition (living side by side) and control
occurred in both southwest Asia and northern Africa,
and even in Europe, among peoples who had an
intimate knowledge of the behavior of wild cattle.
The experiments with domestication probably
occurred in many places, as people living in ever-drier
environments cast around for more predictable food
supplies.
The cattle herders had only a few possessions:
unsophisticated pots and polished adzes. They also
hunted with bow and arrow. The Saharan people left a
remarkable record of their lives painted on the wallsof caves deep in the desert. Their artistic endeavors
have been preserved in paintings of wild animals,
cattle, goats, humans, and scenes of daily life that
extend back perhaps to 5,000 B.C.. The widespread
distribution of pastoral sites of this period suggests
that the Saharans ranged their herds over widely
separated summer and winter grazing grounds.
8.According to paragraph 6, what allowed the herders
to shift south into the savanna regions after about
3,500 B.C.?
A.They could easily grow Mediterranean crops in
those regions.
B.They could more easily domesticated sorghum and
millet in those regions.
C.The tsetse fly was no longer a problem in those
regions.
D.The river systems in those regions provided reliable
sources of water in the summer.
About 3,500 B.C., climatic conditions againdeteriorated . The Sahara slowly became drier and
lakes vanished. On the other hand, rainfall increased
in the interior of western Africa, and the northern
limit of the tsetse fly, an insect fatal to cattle, moved
south. So the herders shifted south, following the
major river systems into savanna regions. By this time,
the Saharan people were probably using domestic
crops, experimenting with such summer rainfall crops
as sorghum and millet as they move out of areas
where they could grow wheat, barley, and other
Mediterranean crops.
adzes: cutting tools with blades set at right angles to
the handle.
Smith believes that the hunters were well aware of the more disciplined ways in which their prey behaved.
Instead of following the cattle on their annual migrations, the hunters began to prevent the herd from moving
from one spot to another. At first, they controlled the movement of the herd while ensuring continuance of their
meat diet. But soon they also gained genetic control of the animals, which led to rapid physical changes in the
herd.
South African farmers who maintain herds of wild eland (large African antelopes with short, twisted horns)
report that the offspring soon diminish in size, unless wild bulls are introduced constantly from outside. The same
effects of inbreeding may have occurred in controlled cattle populations, with some additional, and perhaps
unrecognized, advantages. The newly domesticated animals behaved better, were easier to control, and may have
enjoyed a higher birth rate, which in turn yielded greater milk supplies. We know from rock paintings deep in the
Sahara that the herders were soon selecting breeding animals to produce offspring with different horn shapes and
hide colors.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This knowledge enabled the hunters to adopt a different approach to hunting.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. As recently as 6,000 B.C., much of the Sahara region
was semiarid grassland where humans hunted wild oxen and antelope.
A. There was enough freshwater for Saharan peoples to move freely throughout the region without having to
manage the resources they hunted and gathered.
B. When the drying climate forced cattle and humans close to each other in areas with water supplies, humans
gained control over the cattle and eventually domesticated them.
C. Once Saharans controlled the breeding of their cattle, the characteristics of the cattle changed rapidly,
increasing their reproductive rates and milk production.
D. Herders soon began selecting breeding animals to produce offspring with different horn shapes and hide colors,
although the advantages of controlled inbreeding were not apparent to them at first.
E. Although the Saharan peoples were remarkably sophisticated artists, they had only a few simple possessions,
like adzes and the bows and arrows they used for hunting.
F. As the drought worsened around 3500 B.C. and conditions for herders became more favorable to the south, the
Saharan people moved into savanna regions, where they grew different crops.
TPO28-3 Buck Rubs and Buck Scrapes
1.The word “conspicuous in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.noticeable
B.common
C.strange
D.particular
Aconspicuous sign indicating the presence of
white-tailed deer in a woodlot is a buck rub. A male
deer makes a buck rub by striping the bark (outer
layer) of a small tree with its antlers. When completed,
the buck rub is an obvious visual signal to us and
presumable to other deer in the area. A rub is usually
located at the shoulder height of a deer (one meter or
less above the ground) on a smooth-barked,
small-diameter (16-25 millimeters) tree. The smooth
bark of small red maples makes this species ideal for
buck rubs in the forests of the mid-eastern United
States.
Adult male deer usually produce rubs in late summer
or early autumn when the outer velvet layer is being
shed from their antlers. Rubs are created about one to
two months before the breeding season (the rut).
Hence for a long time biologists believed that male
deer used buck rubs not only to clean and polish
antlers but also to provide practice for the ensuing
male-to-male combat during the rut. However,
biologists also noted deer sniff and lick an unfamiliar
rub, which suggests that this visual mark on a small
tree plays an important communication purpose in the
social life of deer.
2.The studies of forehead rubbing by deer described in
paragraph 3 showed that
A.forehead rubbing encourages the growth of antlers
B.mule deer and white-tailed deer behave differently
during the rut.
C.the rut can occur at different times of the year
D.deer convey important information through scent
3.What can be inferred from paragraph 4 about the
trumpeting of bull elk?
A.Trumpeting by higher-status bull elk signals their
presence to other members of their species.
B.Bull elk need to combine trumpeting with olfactory
signals to convey information about their identity.
C.Trumpeting alerts white-tailed deer to the presence
of bull elk in their vicinity.
D.Trumpeting provides a better measure of deer
presence in a given area than buck rubs do.
Buck rubs also have a scent produced by glands in the
foreheads of deer that is transferred to the tree when
the rub is made. These odors make buck rubs an
important means of olfactory communication
between deer. The importance of olfactory
communication (using odors to communicate) in the
way of life of deer was documented by a study of
captive adult male deer a few decades ago, which
noted that males rubbed their foreheads on branches
and twigs, especially as autumn approached. A decade
later another study reported that adult malewhite-tailed deer exhibited forehead rubbing just
before and during the rut. It was found that when a
white-tailed buck makes a rub, it moves both antlers
and forehead glands along the small tree in a vertical
direction. This forehead rubbing behavior coincides
with a high level of glandular activity in the modified
scent glands found on the foreheads of male deer; the
glandular activity causes the forehead pelage (hairy
covering) of adult males to be distinctly darker than in
females or younger males.
Forehead rubbing by male deer on buck rubs
presumably sends a great deal of information to other
members of the same species. First, the chemicals
deposited on the rub provide information on the
individual identity of an animal; no two mammals
produce the same scent. For instance, as we all know,
dogs recognize each other via smell. Second, because
only male deer rub, the buck rub and its associated
chemicals indicate the sex of the deer producing the
rub. Third, older, more dominant bucks produce more
buck rubs and probably deposit more glandular
secretions on a given rub. Thus the presence of many
well-marked rubs is indicative of older, higher-status
males being in the general vicinity rather than simplybeing a crude measure of relative deer abundance in a
given area. The information conveyed by the olfactory
signals on a buck rub make it the social equivalent of
some auditory signals in other deer species, such as
trumpeting by bull elk.
4.According to paragraph 4, the buck rubs occurring in
a given area reveal all of the following information
about deer EXCEPT
A.the individual identity of the deer
B.the gender of the deer
C.the likely social status of the deer
D.the number of deer in the vicinity
5.The word “induce” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.increase
B.extend
C.delay
D.stimulate
6.According to paragraph 5, which of the following is
true about chemicals in buck rubs?
A.They have to be at least two days old for females to
be able to detect them.
B.They are more effective in older buck rubs than in
fresher ones.
C.They may affect fertility in female deer.
D.They can be more easily detected by young males
than adult females.
7.The word “termed” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.associated with
B.visible as
C.known as
D.provided by
8.According to the passage, in what way do buck
scrapes differ from buck rubs?
A.Buck scrapes are made by both male and female
deer.
B.Buck scrapes are purely visual signals.
C.Buck scrapes are made closer to the breeding
season than buck rubs.
D.Buck scrapes can be smelled only by deer.
Because both sexes of white-tailed respond to buck
rubs by smelling and licking them, rubs may serve a
very important additional function. Fresher buck rubs
(less than two days old), in particular, are visited more
frequently by adult females than older rubs. In view of
this behavior it has been suggested that chemicals
present in fresh buck rubs may help physiologicallyinduce and synchronize fertility in females that visit
these rubs. This would be an obvious advantage to
wide-ranging deer, especially to a socially dominant
buck when courting several adult females during the
autumn rut. Another visual signal produced bywhile-tailed deer is termed a buck scrape. Scrapes
consist of a clearing (about 0.5 meter in diameter) and
shallow depression made by pushing aside the leaves
covering the ground; after making the scrape, the deer
typically urinates in the depression. Thus, like a buck
rub, a scrape is both a visual and an olfactory signal.
Buck scrapes are generally created after leaf-fall in
autumn, which is just before or during the rut. Scrapes
are usually placed in open or conspicuous places, such
as along a deer trail. Most are made by older males,
although females and younger males (2.5 years old or
less) occasionally make scrapes.
397A conspicuous sign indicating the presence of white-tailed deer in a woodlot is a buck rub. A male deer makes a
buck rub by striping the bark (outer layer) of a small tree with its antlers. When completed, the buck rub is an
obvious visual signal to us and presumable to other deer in the area. A rub is usually located at the shoulder
height of a deer (one meter or less above the ground) on a smooth-barked, small-diameter (16-25 millimeters)
tree.
The smooth bark of small red maples makes this species ideal for buck rubs in the forests of the
mid-eastern United States.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This process can take a few hours to several days.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Buck rubs and buck scrapes are two types of markings
made by white-tailed deer.
A. The observation that deer sniff and lick buck rubs first led scientists to connect buck rubs with combat between
adult males during the breeding season.
B. As they rub the bark from trees, male deer leave behind chemicals produced by the glands in their foreheads,
creating a scent that other deer can detect.
C. Buck rubs and buck scrapes are visual signals and smells that deer use to communicate a variety of information
to other deer.
D. The height of a buck rub, the type of tree used, and the direction in which the deer applies the rub can give
different kinds of information to other deer.
E. The number of buck rubs and buck scrapes in a given area changes as the density of the population of male
deer in the area changes.
F. Buck rubs are created close to the breeding season of deer and may affect the timing of fertility in the female
deer that visit the rubs.
TPO29
TPO29-1 Characteristics of Roman Pottery
1.All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as
characteristics of Roman pottery EXCEPT
A.It was usually made with high-quality clay.
B.It generally did not weigh much.
C.It did not break as easily as other ancient pottery.
D.It sometimes had imperfections.
The pottery of ancient Romans is remarkable in
several ways. The high quality of Roman pottery is
very easy to appreciate when handling actual pieces of
tableware or indeed kitchenware and amphorae (the
large jars used throughout the Mediterranean for the
transport and storage of liquids, such as wine and oil).
However, it is impossible to do justice to Roman wares
on the page, even when words can be backed up by
photographs and drawing. Most Roman pottery is light
and smooth to touch and very tough, although, like all
pottery, it shatters if dropped on a hard surface. It is
generally made with carefully selected and purified
clay, worked to thin-walled and standardized shapes
on a fast wheel and fired in a kiln (pottery oven)
capable of ensuring a consistent finish. With
handmade pottery, inevitably there are slight
differences between individual vessels of the same
design and occasional minor blemishes (flaws). But
what strikes the eye and the touch most immediately
and most powerfully with Roman pottery is its
consistent high quality.
This is not just an aesthetic consideration but also a
practical one. These vessels are solid (brittle, but not
fragile), they are pleasant and easy to handle (being
light and smooth), and, with their hard and sometimes
glossy (smooth and shiny) surfaces, they hold liquids
well and are easy to wash. Furthermore, their regular
and standardized shapes would have made them
simple to stack and store. When people today are
shown a very ordinary Roman pot and, in particular,
are allowed to handle it, they often comment on how
modern it looks and feels, and they need to be
convinced of its true age.
2.The author mentions the work of archaeologists in
paragraph 3 in order to
A.support the idea that pottery was produced in large
quantities by the Romans
B.illustrate how hard it is for archaeologists to find
complete pieces of Roman pottery
C.contrast archaeological sites in Roman urban areas
with other sites in the Mediterranean
D.explain why the quantities of pottery found vary
significantly from one site to another
3.The word “substantial” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.protected
B.man-made
C.large
D.famous
4.According to paragraph 4, Monte Testaccio is
particularly important for archaeologists because
archaeologists were able to
A.conclude how amphorae manufacturing increased
rapidly after the second century A.D.
B.find the locations where most of the amphorae in
the Roman Empire were produced
C.obtain relatively accurate calculations of the
quantities of amphorae used over time in that place
D.discover that the Roman state had supported
amphorae production
As impressive as the quality of Roman pottery is its
sheer massive quantity. When considering quantities,
we would ideally like to have some estimates for
overall production from particular sites of pottery
manufacture and for overall consumption at specific
settlements. Unfortunately, it is in the nature of the
archaeological evidence, which is almost invariable
only a sample of what once existed, that such figures
will always be elusive. However, no one who has ever
worked in the field would question the abundance of
Roman pottery, particularly in the Mediterranean
region. This abundance is notable in Roman
settlements (especially urban sites) where the labor
that archaeologists have to put into the washing and
sorting of potsherds (fragments of pottery) constitutes
a high proportion of the total work during the initial
phases of excavation.
Only rarely can we derive any “real” quantities from
deposits of broken pots. However, there is one
exceptional dump, which does represent a very large
part of the site's total history of consumption and for
which an estimate of quantity has been produced. On
the left bank of the Tiber River in Rome, by one of theriver ports of the ancient city, is a substantial hill some
50 meters high called Monte Testaccio. It is made up
entirely of broken oil amphorae, mainly of the second
and third centuries A.D. It has been estimated that
Monte Testaccio contains the remains of some 53
million amphorae, in which around 6,000million liters
of oil were imported into the city from overseas,
imports into imperial Rome were supported by the full
might of the state and were therefore quite
exceptional----but the size of the operations at Monte
Testaccio, and the productivity and complexity that lay
behind them, nonetheless cannot fail to impress. This
was a society with similarities to modern
one----moving goods on a gigantic scale,
manufacturing high-quality containers to do so, and
occasionally, as here, even discarding them on
delivery.
5.Paragraph 4 indicates which of the following about
the port on the Tiber River near Monte Testaccio?
A.It was built around the third century A.D.
B.It was close to areas where large quantities of oil
were produced.
C.It was in use only for a very short period of time.
D.It had impressive level of commercial activity.
6.The statement in paragraph 4 that amphorae
delivered to the port near Monte Testaccio were
occasionally discarded support which of the following?
A.Traders at the port were often careless.
B.The quality of the amphorae used at the port was
not very good.
C.The scale of the trade made it possible to waste
quality amphorae sometimes.
D.The importing of oil from overseas gradually
declined, reducing the need for pottery containers.
7.The statement that “maps show the various spots
where Roman pottery of a particular type has been
found tell only part of the story” makes the point that
A.maps indicate where specific pottery styles have
been found, but they do not indicate where these
styles originated
B.maps show the geographical spread of Roman
pottery but not the people who had access to it
C.maps do not usually include pottery styles found in
the remotest regions the Roman Empire
D.archaeologist studying Roman pottery need to use a
range of techniques in their investigations8.The word “humble” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.rural
B.distant
C.ancient
D.modest
Roman pottery was transported not only in large
quantities but also over substantial distances. Many
Roman pots, in particular amphorae and the fine
wares designed for use at tables, could travel
hundreds of miles----all over the Mediterranean andalso further afield. But maps that show the various
spots where Roman pottery of a particular type has
been found tell only part of the story. What is more
significant than any geographical spread is the access
that different levels of society had to good-quality
products. In all but the remotest regions of the empire,
Roman pottery of a high standard is common at thesites of humble villages and isolated farmsteads.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
That is because residents of a city did not usually discard used pottery at the same site over a long period of time.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The pottery of the ancient Roman Empire is
remarkable. A.Roman pottery is considered to be practical and of consistently high quality.
B. Even though the exact quantity of pottery produced by the Romans is almost impossible to calculate, it is
certain that it was produced in large quantities.
C. Roman pottery was transported over long distances, and different levels of society had access to quality
pottery.
D. People are not familiar with the whole range of pottery the Romans created because most of the available
pieces represent only a limited number of styles and shapes.
E. Archaeologists looking for the remains of Roman pottery concentrate on urban sites because that is where the
oldest pieces of kitchenware and amphorae have been found.
F. It is still unclear to archaeologists what the role of the Roman state in the commercial success of Roman pottery
was.
TPO29-2 Competition
1.The phrase “mechanisms of natural selection” in the
passage is closest in meaning to
A.types of natural selection
B.dangers of natural selection
C.problems natural selection solves
D.ways natural selection works
2.According to paragraph 1, what is one effect of
competition among individuals of different species?
A.It results in the eventual elimination of the resource
for which they are competing.
B.It leads to competition among individuals of the
same species.
C.It encourages new species to immigrate to an area.
D.It controls the number of individuals in the
competing populations.
When several individuals of the same species or of
several different species depend on the same limited
resource, a situation may arise that is referred to as
competition. The existence of competition has been
long known to naturalists; its effects were described
by Darwin in considerable detail. Competition among
individuals of the same species (intraspeciescompetition), one of the major mechanisms of
natural selection , is the concern of evolutionary
biology. Competition among the individuals of
different species (interspecies competition) is a major
concern of ecology. It is one of the factors controlling
the size of competing populations, and extreme cases
it may lead to the extinction of one of the competingspecies. This was described by Darwin for indigenous
New Zealand species of animals and plants, which
died out when competing species from Europe were
introduced.
3.According to paragraph 2, competition is not usually
a significant factor among two coexisting species when
A.one of the species has only recently moved into the
territory of the other B the species are closely
related to each other
C.the population of one species is much larger than
that of the other
D.both of the species are herbivores4.The word “graphically” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.vividly
B.frequently
C.broadly
D.typically
No serious competition exists when the major needed
resource is in superabundant supply, as in most cases
of the coexistence of herbivores (plant eaters).
Furthermore, most species do not depend entirely on
a single resource, if the major resource for a species
becomes scarce, the species can usually shift to
alternative resources. If more than one species is
competing for a scarce resource, the competing
species usually switch to different alternative
resources. Competition is usually most severe among
close relatives with similar demands on the
environment. But it may also occur among totally
unrelated forms that compete for the same resource,
such as seed-eating rodents and ants. The effects ofsuch competition are graphically demonstrated when
all the animals or all the plants in an ecosystem come
into competition, as happened 2 million years ago at
the end of Pliocene, when North and South America
became joined by the Isthmus of Panama. North and
South American species migrating across the Isthmus
now came into competition with each other. The
result was the extermination of a large fraction of the
South American mammals, which were apparently
unable to withstand the competition from invading
North American species----although added predation
was also an important factor.
5.Paragraph 3 supports the idea that Gause's
experiments were important because they
A.provided a situation in which competition could be
removed from the interaction between two species
B.showed that previous ideas about the extent to
which competition determines the composition of a
community were completely mistaken
C.helped establish that competition will remove all but
one species from any given ecological niche
D.offered evidence that competition between species
is minimal when there is an overabundance of a single
food source
6.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Apparent exceptions to this law usually involves
cases in which two species compete for the same
major resource but occupy slightly different niches.
B.Although it may appear that two species always
have different niches, many exceptions show that
species compete with each other.
C.Cases in which two species not only compete for a
shared resource but also occupy similar niches are
considered exceptions to this law.
D.Cases in which the two species do not occupy that
same niche yet still compete for the same resource are
believed to be exceptions to this law.
5.According to paragraph 4, how does competition
affect evolution?
A.It results in the evolution of physical structures that
allow the species to compete with each other more
effectively.
B.It results I the evolutionary extinction of all but one
of the competing species.
C.It results in the competing species evolving in such a
way that they no longer compete for the same
resources.
D.It results in the competing species evolving to
become so much like each other that competition
between them eventually disappears.
To what extent competition determines the
composition of a community and the density of
particular species has been the source of considerable
controversy. The problem is that competition
ordinarily cannot be observed directly but must be
inferred from the spread or increase of one species
and the concurrent reduction or disappearance of
another species. The Russian biologist G. F. Gause
performed numerous tow-species experiments in the
laboratory, in which one of the species became extinct
when only a single kind of resource was available. On
the basis of these experiments and of field
observations, the so-called law of competitive
exclusion was formulated, according to which no twospecies can occupy the same niche. Numerous
seeming exceptions to this law have since been
found, but they can usually be explained as cases in
which the two species, even though competing for a
major joint resource, did not really occupy exactly
the same niche.
Competition among species is of considerable
evolutionary importance. The physical structure of
species competing for resources in the same
ecological niche tends to gradually evolve in ways that
allow them to occupy different niches. Competing
species also tend to change their ranges so that their
territories no longer overlap. The evolutionary effect
of competition on species has been referred to as
“species selection”; however, this description is
potentially misleading. Only the individuals of a
species are subject to the pressures of natural
selection. The effect on the well-being and existence
of a species is just the result of the effects of selectionon all the individuals of the species. Thus species
selection is actually a result of individual selection.
8.According to paragraph 4, “species selection” is a
misleading term because it
A.overemphasizes the role of selection pressure in
species extinction
B.suggests that selection pressures directly influence
whole species
C.does not make a distinction between species
extinction and species evolution
D.suggests that extinction always results whenever
there is a competition
12.The word “regulating” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.controlling
B.explaining
C.observing
D.stopping
Competition may occur for any needed resource. In
the case of animals it is usually food; in the case of
forest plants it may be light; in the case of substrate
inhabitants it may be space, as in many shallow-water
bottom-dwelling marine organisms. Indeed, it may be
for any of the factors, physical as well as biotic, that
are essential for organisms. Competition is usually the
more severe the denser the population. Together with
predation, it is the most important density-dependentfactor in regulating population growth.
Competition may occur for any needed resource. In the case of animals it is usually food; in the case of
forest plants it may be light; in the case of substrate inhabitants it may be space, as in many shallow-water
bottom-dwelling marine organisms. Indeed, it may be for any of the factors, physical as well as biotic, that are
essential for organisms. Competition is usually the more severe the denser the population. Together with
predation, it is the most important density-dependent factor in regulating population growth.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
That is, as the density of a population increases, competition has a greater impact and leads to greater mortality.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. When necessary resources are limited, competition
can occur among individuals of the same species or of different species.
A.Competition can eliminate a species, but since most species do not depend on a single resource, competition is
often reduced by switching to alternative resources.
B. Competition between individuals of the same species is usually for food whereas competition between species
is usually for habitat.
C. Investigation of the ecological role of competition is difficult because ordinarily the competition cannot be
observed directly and must be inferred from its presumed effects.
D. Experiments and field observations have established that competition between species is strong enough to
prevent two species from occupying the same ecologica niche.
E. Competition between a pair of species tends to lessen over time because the species tend to evolve to occupy
different ecological niches and ranges.
F. Competition is usually strongest when the density of the competing populations is the same.
TPO29-3 The History of Waterpower
1.In paragraph 1, uncertainty is expressed about all of
the following aspects of the early development of
waterpower EXCEPT
A.when exactly the very first waterpower devices were
invented
B.when exactly the very first waterpower devices were
developed
C.whether water was one of the earliest sources of
power to be used by humans
D.whether the very earliest waterpower devices arose
independently
2.According to paragraph 2, what was true of the
waterpower mills built throughout the Roman
Empire?
A.Most had horizontal-axis wheels
B.Their design was based on mills that had long been
used in Scandinavia
C.Their design was more popular beyond the Empire's
boundaries than it was within the Empire.
D.They are more advanced than the mills used in the
Middle East at an earlier time.
Moving water was one of the earliest energy sources
to be harnessed to reduce the workload of people and
animals. No one knows exactly when the waterwheel
was invented, but irrigation systems existed at least
5,000 years ago, and it seems probable that the
earliest waterpower device was the noria, a
waterwheel that raised water for irrigation in attached
jars. The device appears to have evolved no later than
the fifth century B.C., perhaps independently in
different regions of the Middle and Far East.
The earliest waterpower mills were probably
vertical-axis mills for grinding corn, known as Norse or
Greek mills, which seem to have appeared during the
first or second century B.C. in the Middle East and a
few centuries later in Scandinavia. In the following
centuries, increasingly sophisticated waterpower mills
were built throughout the Roman Empire and beyond
its boundaries in the Middle East and northern Europe.
In England, the Saxons are thought to have used both
horizontal0 and vertical-axis wheels. The first
documented English mill was in the eighth century,
but three centuries later about 5,000 were recorded,
suggesting that every settlement of any size had its
mill.
3.The phrase “the application of waterpower” in the
passage is closest in meaning to
A.the uses to which waterpower was put
B.the improvement made to waterpower
C.the method by which waterpower was supplied
D.the source of waterpower available
4.According to paragraph 4, which of the following
was discovered as a result of scientific and technical
investigations of waterpower conducted between
1650 and 1800?
A.Some types of small waterwheel can produce as
much horsepower as the very largest wheels.
B.Waterwheels operate more efficiently when water
falls away from their blades slowly than when water
falls away quickly.
C.Waterwheel efficiency can be improved by
increasing the amount of kinetic energy water
contains as it passes over a waterwheel's blades.
D.Unlike other types of waterwheels, the overshot
wheel is capable of producing more than 60
horsepower units of energy.
5.The word “pessimistic” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.negative
B.unlikely
C.surprising
D.incomplete6.The term “by then” in the passage refers to
A.by the time steam power entered the scene
B.by the year 1800
C.by the year 1900
D.by the time waterwheel was becoming obsolete
Raising water and grinding corn were by no means the
only uses of the waterpower mill, and during the
following centuries, the applications of waterpower
kept pace with the developing technologies of mining,
iron working, paper making, and the wool and cotton
industries. Water was the main source of mechanical
power, and by the end of the seventeenth century,
England alone is thought to have had some 20,000
working mill.
There was much debate on the relative efficiencies of
different types of waterwheels. The period from about
1650 until 1800 saw some excellent scientific and
technical investigations of different designs. They
revealed output powers ranging from about 1
horsepower to perhaps 60 for the largest wheels and
confirmed that for maximum efficiency, the water
should pass across the blades as smoothly as possible
and fall away with minimum speed, having given up
almost all of its kinetic energy. (They also proved that,
in principle, the overshot wheel, a type of wheel in
which an overhead stream of water powers the wheel,
should win the efficiency competition.)
But then steam power entered the scene, putting the
whole future of waterpower in doubt. An energy
analyst writing in the year 1800 would have painted avery pessimistic picture of the future for waterpower.
The coal-fired steam engine was taking over, and the
waterwheel was fast becoming obsolete. However, like
many later experts, this one would have suffered from
an inability to see into the future. A century later thepicture was completely different: by then , the world
had an electric industry, and a quarter of its
generating capacity was water powered.
7.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The growth of the electric-power industry
stimulated significant changes in hydro technology
and scientific progress in electrotechnology in the
nineteenth century.
B.The changes in hydro technology that led to the
growth of the electric-power industry also led to
discoveries and developments in electrotechnology in
the nineteenth century.
C.Advances in electrotechnology in the nineteenth
century and changes in hydro technology were
responsible for the growth of the electric-power
industry.
D.In the nineteenth century, the scientific study of
electrotechnology and hydro technology benefited
greatly from the growth of the electric-power
industry.
8.The discussion of the history of electric power
production in paragraph 6 supports which of the
following?
A.1832 marked the beginning of the industrial
production of electric power.
B.Turbines using Benoit Fourneyron's design were
eventually used to generate electric power.
C.Benoit Fourneyron quickly applied Michael Faraday's
discovery about electric fields to acquire a pattern for
a new and more efficient waterwheel.
D.Practical advances in hydro technology were more
important to the development of electric power than
were advances in the theoretical understanding of
electricity.
The growth of the electric-power industry was the
result of a remarkable series of scientific discoveries
and development in electrotechnology during the
nineteenth century, but significant changes in what
we might now call hydro (water) technology also
played their part. In 1832, the year of Michael
Faraday's discovery that a changing magnetic field
produces an electric field, a young French engineer
patented a new and more efficient waterwheel. His
name was Benoit Fourneyron, and his device was the
first successful water turbine. (The word turbine
comes form the Latin turbo: something that spins).
The waterwheel, unaltered for nearly 2,000 years, had
finally been superseded.
410Half a century of development was needed before
Faraday's discoveries in electricity were translated into
full-scale power stations. In 1881 the Godalming
power station in Surrey, England, on the banks of the
Wey River, created the world's first public electricity
supply. The power source of this most modern
technology was a traditional waterwheel.
Unfortunately this early plant experienced the
problem common to many forms of renewable energy:
the flow in the Wey River was unreliable, and the
waterwheel was soon replaced by a steam engine.
From this primitive start, the electric industry grew
during the final 20 years of the nineteenth century at
a rate seldom if ever exceeded by any technology. The
capacity of individual power stations, many of them
hydro plants, rose from a few kilowatts to over a
megawatt in less than a decade.
There was much debate on the relative efficiencies of different types of waterwheels. The period from about
1650 until 1800 saw some excellent scientific and technical investigations of different designs. They revealed
output powers ranging from about 1 horsepower to perhaps 60 for the largest wheels and confirmed that for
maximum efficiency, the water should pass across the blades as smoothly as possible and fall away with minimum
speed, having given up almost all of its kinetic energy. (They also proved that, in principle, the overshot wheel, a
type of wheel in which an overhead stream of water powers the wheel, should win the efficiency competition.) 
9.Look at the four squares [] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Happily, serious studies began to be conducted to help resolve disagreements.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Ever since the development of waterwheel, which
occurred no later than 500 B.C., people have used moving water as a source of power.
A.The first water-powered machines were probably used to grind corn, and as technology advanced, waterwheels
were used as the main source of power in many industries.
B. Almost every large town in England had a waterpower mill, allowing England to become the world's leader in
industries that depended on water for their power.
C. In the late nineteenth century an electric power station in England began using water power from a nearby river,
creating a dependable source of power that quickly replaced the steam engine.
D. Waterpower mills were probably invented about the same time in the Middle East and Scandinavia and then
spread to England by about the second century B.C.
E. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, design improvements in waterwheels led to discoveries of how to
increase their efficiency and power output.
F.After declining in importance in the early 1800 's, waterpower came back into demand by the end of the century
as a means to power electric plants and water turbines.
TPO30
TPO30-1 Role of Play in Development
1.According to paragraph 1, why is play difficult to
define?
A.Play must be defined with concepts, not examples.
B.Play behavior often looks like nonplay behavior
C.Play often occurs in the presence of animals that are
not playing
D.Play occurs independently of an animal's intentions
2.According to paragraph 2, which of the following
presents a particular challenge to researchers who
study play behavior in animals
A.The delay between activities and the benefits the
animal derives from them.
B.The difficulty in determining which animal species
play and which do not.
C.The fact that for most animals, there is no clear
transition from youth to full adulthood.
D.The lack of research on the play behavior of animals
other than canids and primates.
Play is easier to define with examples than with
concepts. In any case, in animals it consists of leaping,
running, climbing, throwing, wrestling, and other
movements, either along, with objects, or with other
animals. Depending on the species, play may be
primarily for social interaction, exercise, or exploration.
One of the problems in providing a clear definition of
play is that it involves the same behaviors that take
place in other circumstance--dominance, predation,
competition, and real fighting. Thus, whether play
occurs or not depends on the intention of the animals,
and the intentions are not always clear from behaviors
alone.
Play appears to be a developmental characteristic of
animals with fairly sophisticated nervous systems,
mainly birds and mammals. Play has been studied
most extensively in primates and canids (dogs). Exactly
why animals play is still a matter debated in the
research literature, and the reasons may not be the
same for every species that plays. Determining the
functions of play is difficult because the functions may
be long-term, with beneficial effects not showing up
until the animal's adulthood.
3.The word “considerable” in the passage is closest in
the meaning to
A.Initial
B.Practical
C.Eventually
D.Significant
4.According to paragraph 3, each of the following is a
cost to animals that engage in play EXCEPT
A.exposure to predators
B.a buildup of fat stores
C.a loss of fuel that could be used for growth
D.risk of injury from slipping or falling
5.Paragraph 4 supports which of the following
statements about an animal's brain.
A.The heavier the brain, the richer the environment in
which the animal was raised.
B.The younger the animal, the harder it is to develop
new connections between nerve cells.
C.The larger the animal, the harder it is to develop
new connections between nerve cells.
D.The larger the animal's cerebellum, the larger will be
the animal's nerve cells.
Play is not without considerable costs to the individual
animal. Play is usually very active, involving movement
in space and, at times, noisemaking. Therefore, it
results in the loss of fuel or energy that might better
be used for growth or for building up fat stores in a
young animal. Another potential cost of this activity is
greater exposure to predators since play is
attention-getting behavior. Great activities also
increase the risk of injury in slipping or falling.
The benefits of play must outweigh costs, or play
would not have evolved, according to Darwin' s theory.
Some of the potential benefits relate directly to the
healthy development of the brain and nervous system.
In one research study, two groups of young rats were
raised under different conditions. One group
developed in an "enriched" environment, which
allowed the rats to interact with other rats, play with
toys, and receive maze training. The other group lived
in an "impoverished" environment in individual cages
in a dimly lit room with little stimulation. At the end of
the experiments, the results showed that the actual
weight of the brains of the impoverished rats was less
than that of those raised in the enriched environment(though they were fed the same diets ). Other studies
have shown that greater stimulation not only affects
the size of the brain but also increase the number of
connections between the nerve cells. Thus, active play
may provide necessary stimulation to the growth of
synaptic connections in the brain, especially the
cerebellum, which is responsible for motor functioning
and movements.
6.According to paragraph 5, why might play behavior
of prey species be different from those of predator
species?
A.Unlike predator species, prey species use play to
prevent inappropriate social behaviors, such as biting.
B.Some prey species are physically incapable of certain
types of predator movements.
C.The survival of each species type is linked to
particular sets of muscular movements.
D.Predator species have more opportunities to
practice play behaviors than prey species.
7.The word “comparative” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.relative
B.temporary
C.sufficient
D.complete
Play also stimulates the development of the muscle
tissues themselves and may provide the opportunities
to practice those movements needed for survival. Prey
species, like young deer or goats, for example,
typically play by performing sudden flight movements
and turns, whereas predator species, such as cats,
practice stalking, pouncing, and biting.
Play allows a young animal to explore its environmentand practice skill in comparative safety since the
surrounding adults generally do not expect the young
to deal with threats or predators. Play can also provide
practice in social behaviors needed for courtship andmating. Learning appropriate social behaviors is
especially important for species that live in groups,
like young monkeys that needed to learn to control
selfishness and aggression and to understand the
give-and-take involved in social groups. They need to
learn how to be dominant and submissive because
each monkey might have to play either role in the
future. Most of these things are learned in the long
developmental periods that primates have, during
which they engage in countless play experiences with
their peers.
8.What can be inferred from paragraph 6 about the
role of adults in play activities of the young?
A.Adults help their young learn to become dominant
within the social group.
B.Young animals learn how to play from the adults
within their social group.
C.Adults allow the young to engage in play behaviors
within a protected, sage environment.
D.The long developmental period of some animals
allows adults more time to teach their young how to
deal with the threats of predators.
There is a danger, of course, that play may be
misinterpreted or not recognized as play by others,
potentially leading to aggression. This is especially
true when play consists of practicing normal
aggressive or predator behaviors. Thus, many species
have evolved clear signals to delineate playfulness.
Dogs, for example, will wag their tails, get down their
front legs, and stick their behinds in the air to indicate
"what follows is just for play."
416There is a danger, of course, that play may be misinterpreted or not recognized as play by others, potentially
leading to aggression. This is especially true when play consists of practicing normal aggressive or predator
behaviors. Thus, many species have evolved clear signals to delineate playfulness. Dogs, for example, will wag
their tails, get down their front legs, and stick their behinds in the air to indicate "what follows is just for play." 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
With messages such as those, even dogs that are strangers to each other can be playing within a few minutes.
10.Directions: an introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary be selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Play appears to be a developmental characteristic of
animals with fairly sophisticated nervous systems, mainly birds and mammals.
Answer Choices
A.Although play often resembles aggression, flight, or other purposeful activities, researchers do not degree on
the reasons for and functions of play.
B.Although many animals develop physically from play, too many young animals become victims of their natural
predators while playing.
C.Animals such as rats, dogs, deer, goats and monkeys learn how to be both dominant and submissive during play
activities so that they will fit in better with their adult social groups.
D.The function of play is still debated in the research literature primarily because each animal species uses so few
of the many available types of play behavior.
E.Energy expenditure and security risks are some of the costs to animals of play behavior, but the costs are not so
great that they outweigh the long-term benefits of play to the species.
F.As experiments and observations have shown, animals that play at some stages of their development obtain
neurological, muscular, or social benefits from the play behaviors.
TPO30-2 The Pace of Evolutionary Change
1.According to paragraph 1, all of the following are
true EXCEPT
A.Darwin saw evolutionary change as happening
slowly and gradually
B.Gaps in the fossil record were used to explain why it
is difficult to see continuous small changes in the
evolution of species
C.Darwin's evolutionary thesis was rejected because
small changes could not be observed in the
evolutionary record
D.By the early twentieth century, most biologists
believed that gradualism explained evolutionary
change
2.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The punctuated equilibrium hypothesis challenged
gradualism, which holds that species evolve in
relatively sudden bursts of brief duration.
B.The punctuated equilibrium hypothesis developed
by Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge was
challenged in 1972.
C.In 1972 Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge
challenged gradualism by positing that change from
one species to another cannot occur without a lengthy
transition period.
D.The punctuate equilibrium hypothesis, in opposition
to gradualism, holds that transitions from one species
to another occur in comparatively sudden burst.
A heated debate has enlivened recent studies of
evolution. Darwin' s original thesis, and the viewpoint
supported by evolutionary gradualists, is that species
change continuously but slowly and in small
increments. Such changes are all but invisible over the
short time scale of modern observations, and, it isargued, they are usually obscured by innumerable
gaps in the imperfect fossil record. Gradualism, with
its stress on the slow pace of change, is a comforting
position, repeated over and over again in generations
of textbooks. By the early twentieth century, the
question about the rate of evolution had been
answered in favor of gradualism to most biologists'
satisfaction.
Sometimes a closed question must be reopened as
new evidence or new arguments based on oldevidence come to light. In 1972 paleontologist
Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge challenged
conventional wisdom with an opposing viewpoint,
the punctuated equilibrium hypothesis, which posits
that species give rise to new species in relatively
sudden bursts, without a lengthy transition period.
These episodes of rapid evolution are separated by
relatively long static spans during which a species may
hardly change at all.
3.According to paragraph 1 and paragraph 2, the
punctuated equilibrium hypothesis and the
gradualism hypothesis differed about
A.Whether the fossil record is complete
B.Whether all species undergo change
C.Whether evolution proceeds an a constant rate
D.How many new species occur over long periods of
time
4.According to paragraph 3, the lack of intermediate
fossils in the fossil record of some species
A.has been extensively studied by paleontologist for
over a century
B.contradicts the idea that most species have
remained unchanged for millions of years
C.challenges the view that evolutionary change is
gradual
D.is most common in the fossil records of clam and
coral species5.The word “compelling” in the passage is closest in
the meaning to
A.surprising
B.persuasive
C.controversial
D.detailed
The punctuated equilibrium hypothesis attempts to
explain a curious feature of the fossil record --- one
that has been familiar to paleontologist for more than
a century but has usually been ignored. Many species
appear to remain unchanged in the fossil record for
millions of years --- a situation that seems to be at
odds with Darwin' s model of continuous change.
Intermediated fossil forms, predicted by gradualism,
are typically lacking. In most localities a given species
of clam or coral persists essentially unchanged
throughout a thick formation of rock, only to be
replaced suddenly by a new and different species.
The evolution of North American horse, which was
once presented as a classic textbook example ofgradual evolution, is now providing equally compelling
evidence for punctuated equilibrium. A convincing
50-million-year sequence of modern horse ancestors
--- each slightly larger, with more complex teeth, a
longer face, and a more prominent central toe
---seemed to provide strong support for Darwin' s
contention that species evolve gradually. But close
examination of those fossil deposits now reveals a
somewhat different story. Horses evolved in discrete
steps, each of which persisted almost unchanged for
millions of years and was eventually replaced by a
distinctive newer model. The four-toed Eohippus
preceded the three-toed Miohippus, for example, but
North American fossil evidence suggests a jerky,
uneven transition between the two. If evolution had
been a continuous, gradual process, one might expect
that almost every fossil specimen would be slightly
different from every year
6.The word “alteration” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.imperfection
B.replacement
C.change
D.duplication7.The word “occasionally” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.undoubtedly
B.basically
C.once in a while
D.to some extent
8.The main purpose of paragraph 7 is to
A.Describe one test of the competing theories
B.Provide an example of punctuated equilibrium
C.Describe how segmented animals evidence both
competing theories
D.Explain why trilobites became extinct
If it seems difficult to conceive how major changes
could occur rapidly, consider this: an alteration of a
single gene in files is enough to turn a normal fly with
a single pair of wings into one that has two pairs of
wings.
The question about the rate of evolution must now be
turned around: does evolution ever proceed gradually,
or does it always occur in short bursts? Detailed field
studies of thick rock formations containing fossils
provide the best potential tests of the competing
theories.
Occasionally , a sequence of fossil-rich layers of rock
permits a comprehensive look at one type of organism
over a long period of time. For example, Peter
Sheldon' s studies of trilobites, a now extinct marine
animal with a segmented body, offer a detailed
glimpse into three million years of evolution in one
marine environment. In that study, each of eight
different trilobite species was observed to undergo a
gradual change in the number of segments --- typically
an increase of one or two segments over the whole
time interval. No significant discontinuous were
observed, leading Sheldon to conclude that
environmental conditions were quite stable during the
period he examined.
420Similar exhaustive studies are required for many different kinds of organisms from many different periods.
Most researchers expect to find that both modes of transition from one species to another are at work in
evolution. Slow, continuous change may be the norm during periods of environmental stability, while rapid
evolution of new species occurs during periods of environment stress. But a lot more studies like Sheldon' s are
needed before we can say for sure.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
could the sentence best fit?
They believe that environmental conditions may play a crucial role in determining which of the two modes will be
in operation over a given period.
10.Directions: selected from the seven phrases below the phrases that correctly characterize punctuated
equilibrium and the phrases that correctly characterize gradualism. Two of the phrases will not be used. This
question is worth 3 points .
Answer Choices
A. States that new species emerge from existing species during relatively brief period of time
B. Was first formulated by Charles Darwin
C. Explain why North American horses have become smaller over time
D. States that new species evolve slowly and continuously from existing species
E. Explain the lack of intermediate fossil forms in the fossil record of many species
F. States that a species will not change unless its environmental changes
G. Is associated with periods of environmental stability
punctuated equilibrium
Gradualism
TPO30-3 The Invention of the Mechanical Clock
1.Why does the author provide the information that
"in northern Europe the sun may be hidden by clouds
for weeks at a time, while temperatures vary not only
seasonally but from day to night"? A.To emphasize
the variety of environments in which people used sun
and water clocks to tell time
B.To illustrate the disadvantage of sun and water
clocks
C.To provide an example of an area where water clocks
have an advantage over sun clocks
D.To counter the claim that sun and water clocks were
used all over Europe
2.According to paragraph 2, all of the following are
examples of the importance of timekeeping to
medieval European society EXCEPT
A.the need of different towns to coordinate
timekeeping with each other
B.the setting of specific times for the opening and
closing of markets
C.the setting of specific time for the start and finish of
the working day
D.the regulation of the performance of daily church
rituals
3.According to paragraph 2, why did the medieval
church need an alarm arrangement?
A.The alarm warned the monks of discord or strife in
the town.
B.The church was responsible for regulating working
hours and market hours.
C.The alarm was needed in case fires were not put out
each night.
D.One of the church's daily rituals occurred during the
night.
In Europe, before the introduction of the mechanical
clock, people told time by sun (using, for example,
shadow sticks or sun dials) and water clocks. Sun
clocks worked, of course, only on clear days; water
clocks misbehaved when the temperature fell toward
freezing, to say nothing of long-run drift as the result
of sedimentation and clogging. Both these devicesworked well in sunny climates; but in northern Europe
the sun may be hidden by clouds for weeks at a time,
while temperatures vary not only seasonally but
from day to night.
Medieval Europe gave new importance to reliable
time. The Catholic Church had its seven daily prayers,
one of which was at night, requiring an alarm
arrangement to waken monks before dawn. And then
the new cities and towns, squeezed by their walls, had
to know and order time in order to organize collective
activity and ration space. They set a time to go to
sleep. All this was compatible with older devices solong as there was only one authoritative timekeeper;
but with urban growth and the multiplication of time
signals, discrepancy brought discord and strife. Society
needed a more dependable instrument of time
measurement and found it in the mechanical clock.
4.The author uses the phrase “ the timekeeper of last
resort ” to refer to
A.water clocks
B.the sun
C.mechanical clocks
D.the church5.The word “ rudimentary ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.rare
B.small
C.impractical
D.basic
6.According to paragraph 4, how did the Catholic
Church react to the introduction of mechanical clocks?
A.Its used mechanical clocks through the period of
urban collapse
B.It used clocks to better understand natural
phenomena, like equinoxes
C.It tried to preserve its own method of keeping time,
which was different from mechanical-clock time.
D.It used mechanical clocks to challenge secular, town
authorities.
We do not know who invented this machine, or where.
It seems to have appeared in Italy and England
(perhaps simultaneous invention) between 1275 and
Once known, it spread rapidly, driving out water
clocks but not solar dials, which were needed to checkthe new machines against the timekeeper of last
resort. These early versions were rudimentary ,
inaccurate, and prone to breakdown.
Ironically, the new machine tended to undermine
Catholic Church authority. Although church ritual had
sustained an interest in timekeeping throughout the
centuries of urban collapse that followed the fall of
Rome, church time was nature' s time. Day and night
were divided into the same number of parts, so that
except at the equinoxes, days and night hours were
unequal; and then of course the length of these hours
varied with the seasons. But the mechanical clock kept
equal hours, and this implied a new time reckoning.
The Catholic Church resisted, not coming over to the
new hours for about a century. From the start,
however, the towns and cities took equal hours astheir standard, and the public clocks installed in town
halls and market squares became the very symbol of a
new, secular municipal authority. Every town wanted
one; conquerors seized them as especially precious
spoils of war; tourists came to see and hear these
machines the way they made pilgrimages to sacred
relics.
7.Paragraph 5 answers which of the following
questions about mechanical clocks.
A.How did early mechanical clocks work?
B.Why did the design of mechanical clocks affect
engineering in general?
C.How were mechanical clocks made?
D.What influenced the design of the first mechanical
clock?
8.According to paragraph 6, how did the mechanical
clock affect labor? A.It encouraged workers to do
more time-filling busywork.
B.It enabled workers to be more task oriented.
C.It pushed workers to work more hours every day.
D.It led to a focus on productivity.
The clock was the greatest achievement of medieval
mechanical ingenuity. Its general accuracy could be
checked against easily observed phenomena, like the
rising and setting of the sun. The result was relentless
pressure to improve technique and design. At every
stage, clockmakers led the way to accuracy and
precision; they became masters of miniaturization,
detectors and correctors of error, searchers for newand better. They were thus the pioneers of mechanical
engineering and served as examples and teachers to
other branches of engineering.
The clock brought order and control, both collective
and personal. Its public display and private possession
laid the basis for temporal autonomy: people could
now coordinate comings and goings without dictation
from above. The clock provided the punctuation
marks for group activity, while enabling individuals to
order their own work (and that of others) so as to
enhance productivity. Indeed, the very notion of
productivity is a by-product of the clock: once on can
relate performance to uniform time units, work is
never the same. One moves from the task-oriented
time consciousness of the peasant (working on job
after another, as time and light permit) and the
time-filling busyness of the domestic servant (who
always had something to do) to an effort to maximize
product per unit of time.
Ironically, the new machine tended to undermine Catholic Church authority. Although church ritual had sustained
an interest in timekeeping throughout the centuries of urban collapse that followed the fall of Rome, church time
was nature' s time. Day and night were divided into the same number of parts, so that except at the equinoxes,
days and night hours were unequal; and then of course the length of these hours varied with the seasons. But
the mechanical clock kept equal hours, and this implied a new time reckoning. The Catholic Church resisted, not
coming over to the new hours for about a century. From the start, however, the towns and cities took equal
hours as their standard, and the public clocks installed in town halls and market squares became the very symbol
of a new, secular municipal authority. Every town wanted one; conquerors seized them as especially precious
spoils of war; tourists came to see and hear these machines the way they made pilgrimages to sacred relics.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
The division of time no longer reflected the organization of religious ritual.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. The introduction of the mechanical clock caused
important changes to the society of medieval Europe.
Answer Choices
A. The increasing complexity of social and economic activity in medieval Europe led to the need for a more
dependable means of keeping time than sun and water clocks provided.
B. Because they were unreliable even in sunny climates, sun clocks and water clocks were rarely used in Europe,
even before the invention of the mechanical clock.
C. Before the mechanical clock, every city wanted a large number of timekeepers because more timekeepers
allowed for better organization of collective activities.
D. Soon after the invention of mechanical clocks, sun and water clocks became obsolete because mechanical
clocks were far more accurate.
E. Although society in general was quick to adopt the mechanical clock , the Catholic Church resisted it because it
challenged the authority of the church
F. Clockmakers introduced precision engineering and their clocks gave individuals and groups more control over
the organization of their activities.
TPO31
TPO31-1 Speciation in Geographically Isolated Populations
1.According to paragraph 1, allopatric speciation
involves which of the following?
A.The division of a population into subspecies
B.The reuniting of separated populations after they
have become distinct species
C.The movement of a population to a new homeland
D.The absence of gene flow between subpopulations
2.Why does the author provide the information that“subpopulations of most species are separated from
each other by some measurable distance "?
A.To indicate how scientists are able to determine
whether subpopulations of a species are allopatric
B.To define what it means for a group of animals or
plants to be a subpopulation
C.To suggest that allopatric speciation is not the only
route to speciation
D.To help explain why allopatric speciation is a
common way for new species to come about
Evolutionary biologists believe that speciation, the
formation of a new species, often begins when some
kind of physical barrier arises and divides a population
of a single species into separate subpopulations.
Physical separation between subpopulationspromotes the formation of new species because once
the members of one subpopulation can no longer
mate with members of another subpopulation, they
cannot exchange variant genes that arise in one of the
subpopulations. In the absence of gene flow between
the subpopulations, genetic differences between thegroups begin to accumulate . Eventually the
subpopulations become so genetically distinct that
they cannot interbreed even if the physical barriers
between them were removed. At this point the
subpopulations have evolved into distinct species. This
route to speciation is known as allopatry (“allo-”
means “different”, and “patria” means “homeland”).
Allopatric speciation may be the main speciation route.
This should not be surprising, since allopatry is prettycommon. In general, the subpopulations of most
species are separated from each other by some
measurable distance . So even under normal situations
the gene flow among the subpopulations is more of an
intermittent trickle than a steady stream. In addition,
barriers can rapidly arise and shut off the trickle. For
example, in the 1800s a monstrous earthquake
changed the course of the Mississippi River, a large
river flowing in the central part of the United States of
America. The change separated populations of insects
now living along opposite shores, completely cutting
off gene flow between them.
3.In paragraph 2, why does the author mention that
some insect populations were separated from each
other by a change in the course of Mississippi River
caused by an earthquake?
A.To make the point that some kind of physical barrier
separates the subpopulations of most species
B.To support the claim that the condition of allopatry
can sometimes arise in a short time
C.To provide an example of a situation in which gene
flow among the populations a species happens at a
slow rate
D.To explain why insect living along opposite shores of
the Mississippi River are very different from each
other.
4.According to paragraph 3, separation of
subpopulations by glaciers resulted in speciation in
those groups of plants and animals that
A.Were reproductively isolated even after the glaciers
disappeared
B.Had adjusted to the old conditions caused by the
glaciers
C.Were able to survive being separated from their
parent population
D.Had experienced some genetic divergences from
their parent population
Geographic isolation can also proceed slowly, over
great spans of time. We find evidence of such
extended events in the fossil record, which affords
glimpse into the breakup of formerly continuous
environments. For example, during past ice ages,
glaciers advanced down through North America and
Europe and gradually cut off parts of populations from
one another. When the glaciers retreated, the
separated populations of plants and animals came into
contact again. Some groups that had descended from
the same parent population were no longer
reproductively compatible – they had evolved into
separate species. In other groups, however, genetic
divergences had not proceeded so far, and the
descendants could still interbreed – for them,
reproductive isolation was not completed, and so
speciation had not occurred.
5.The word “ colossal ” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Consistent
B.Gradual
C.Enormous
D.Effective
6.According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
true of the geologic movements that brought about
the Isthmus of Panama?
A.The movements brought populations of certain
fishes and marine organisms into contact with one
another for the first time.
B.The movements transferred populations of fishes
and other marine animals between the Pacific and
Atlantic Oceans.
C.The movement created conditions that allowed
water to flow more freely between the Pacific and
Atlantic Oceans.
D.The movement created conditions for the formation
of new species of fishes and other marine animals.
7.According to paragraph 5, by comparing the
enzymes from two related groups of fishes on
opposite sides of the isthmus, Graves found evidence
that
A.There were slight genetic divergences between the
two groups
B.The Atlantic group of fishes were descended from
the Pacific group of fishes
C.The temperature of water on either side of the
isthmus had changed
D.Genetic changes in the Atlantic group of fishes were
more rapid an frequent than in the Pacific group of
fishes
Allopatric speciation can also be brought by the
imperceptibly slow but colossal movements of the
tectonic plates that make up Earth's surface. About 5
million years ago such geologic movements created
the land bridge between North America and South
America that we call the Isthmus of Panama . While
previously the gap between the continents had
allowed a free flow of water, now the isthmus
presented a barrier that divided the Atlantic Ocean
from the Pacific Ocean. This division set the stage for
allopatric speciation among populations of fishes and
other marine species.
In the 1980s, John Graves studied two populations of
closely related fishes, one population from the
Atlantic side of isthmus, the other from the Pacific side.
He compared four enzymes found in the muscles of
each population. Graves found that all four Pacific
enzymes function better at lower temperatures than
the four Atlantic versions of the same enzymes. This is
significant because Pacific seawater if typically 2 to 3
degrees cooler than seawater on the Atlantic side of
isthmus. Analysis by gel electrophoresis revealed slight
differences in amino acid sequence of the enzymes of
two of the four pairs. This is significant because theamino acid sequence of an enzyme is determined by
genes.
8.Which of the sentence below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Graves's study provides evidence that isthmus fishes
are in the process of becoming geographically
isolated.
B.Graves's study of mutating isthmus fishes yields
results that differ from results of other studies
involving allopatric speciation.
C.Graves's study of isolated populations of isthmus
fishes provides some evidence that allopatric
speciation might be beginning.
D.Graves's study indicates that when isolated,
populations of isthmus fishes register neutral or
adaptive mutations.
Graves drew two conclusions from these observations.
First, at least some of the observed differences
between the enzymes of the Atlantic and Pacific fish
populations were not random but were the result of
evolutionary adaptation. Second, it appears that
closely related populations of fishes on both sides of
the isthmus are starting to genetically diverge fromeach other. Because Graves' study of geographically
isolated populations of isthmus fishes offers a
glimpse of the beginning of a process of gradual
accumulation of mutations that are neutral or
adaptive, divergences here might be evidence of
allopatric speciation in process.
Allopatric speciation can also be brought by the imperceptibly slow but colossal movements of the tectonic plates
that make up Earth's surface. About 5 million years ago such geologic movements created the land bridge
between North America and South America that we call the Isthmus of Panama . While previously the gap
between the continents had allowed a free flow of water, now the isthmus presented a barrier that divided the
Atlantic Ocean from the Pacific Ocean. This division set the stage for allopatric speciation among populations of
fishes and other marine species. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
The formation of the isthmus had important consequences for global patterns of ocean water flow.
10.Prose Summary. Allopatric speciation takes place when physically separated populations of a single species
gradually diverge genetically to the point of becoming unable to interbreed.
Answer Choices
A. Allopatric speciation is common because the gene flow between subpopulations is generally limited and the
barriers that completely separate subpopulations can arise in a variety of ways.
B. During past ice ages, some, but not all, subpopulations separated by glaciers evolved into distinct species.
C. Speciation does not need to take place through allopatry because subpopulations will form distinct species
whenever there are adaptive advantages to not interbreeding with other subpopulations.
D. Physical barriers from glaciers and the movement of tectonic plates form so slowly that the subpopulations on
either side of the barriers usually do not form distinct species.
E. Graves's study of fish populations separated by the Isthmus of Panama may well provide a picture of the
beginning stages of speciation.
F. Graves's study of physically separated fish populations show that there must be large differences between the
environments of the isolated populations if allopatric speciation is to take place.
TPO31-2
1.The word “whereas”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Although
B.Because
C.Moreover
D.already
2.It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that the Head
Start program was designed to serve children who
A.Come from families that do not have a lot of money
B.Are not doing very well in kindergarten
C.Were born in the 1950s
D.Need programs that focus primarily on social and
emotional factors
Preschools – educational programs for children under
the age of five – differ significantly from one country
to another according to the views that different
societies hold regarding the purpose of early
childhood education. For instance, in a cross-country
comparison of preschools in China, Japan, and the
United States, researchers found that parents in the
three countries view the purpose of preschools verydifferently. Whereas parents in China tend to see
preschools primarily as a way of giving children a good
start academically, Japanese parents view them
primarily as a way of giving children the opportunity
to be members of a group. In the United States, in
comparison, parents regard the primary purpose of
preschools as making children more independent and
self-reliant, although obtaining a good academic start
and having group experience are also important.
While many programs designed for preschoolers focus
primarily on social and emotional factors, some are
geared mainly toward promoting cognitive gains and
preparing preschoolers for the formal instruction they
will experience when they start kindergarten. In the
United States, the best-known program designed to
promote future academic success is Head Start.
Established in the 1960s when the United States
declared the War on Poverty, the program has served
over 13 million children and their families. The
program, which stresses parental involvement, was
designed to serve the “whole child”, including
children's physical health, self-confidence, social
responsibility, and social and emotional development.
3.In paragraph 4, the author mentions the “results
from other types of readiness programs ” to
A.Provide support for the idea that preschool
readiness programs have been somewhat successful
B.Question the idea that Head Start is more effective
than other preschool readiness programs
C.Indicate school completion is usually the most
reliable indicator of success in most readiness
programs
D.Emphasize that participating in readiness programs
can be increased if costs are reduced
4.According to paragraph 4, a cost-benefit analysis of
one preschool readiness program revealed that
A.Only one dollar's worth of benefit was gained for
every seven dollars spent on the program
B.The benefits of the program lasted only until the
participants reached age 27
C.Taxpayers saved seven dollars for every dollar spent
on the program
D.To be successful, the program would need to receive
about seven times as much money as it currently
receives
Whether Head Start is seen as successful or not
depends on the lens through which one is looking. If,
for instance, the program is expected to provide
long-term increases in IQ (intelligence quotient) scores,
it is a disappointment. Although graduates of Head
Start programs tend to show immediate IQ gains,
these increases do not last. On the other hand, it is
clear that Head Start is meeting its goal of getting
preschoolers ready for school. Preschoolers who
participate in Head Start are better prepared for
future schooling than those who do not. Furthermore,
graduates of Head Start programs have better future
school grade. Finally, some research suggests that
ultimately Head Start graduates show higher academic
performance at the end of high school, although the
gains are modest.
In addition, results from other types of preschool
readiness programs indicate that those who
participate and graduate are less likely to repeat
grades, and they are more likely to complete school
than readiness program, for every dollar spent on the
program, taxpayers saved seven dollars by the time
the graduates reached the age of 27.
5.The word “comprehensive ” in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.Easily understood
B.Thorough
C.Respectable
D.Objective
6.According to paragraph 5, which of the following is
true about the benefits of early intervention
programs?
A.These programs produce good short-term benefits
but few long-term benefits.
B.Only the most expensive programs provide
substantial benefits.
C.The Head Start program provides a range of benefits
that no other program can provide.
D.Some children benefit more than others do from
these programs.
7.The word “seek” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Claim
B.Manage
C.Fail
D.Attempt8.The passage mentions “developmental psychologist
David Elkind ”in order to
A.Give an example of an expert who has designed an
effective early childhood education program
B.Introduce an alternative view about the value of
early childhood education
C.Explain why early childhood education programs are
less effective in the United States than in other
countries
D.Refute the claim that academic success isdependent on factors outside parents' control.
The most recent comprehensive evaluation of early
intervention programs suggests that, taken as a group,
preschool programs can provide significant benefits,
and that government funds invested early in life may
ultimately lead to a reduction in future costs. For
instance, compared with children who did not
participate in early intervention programs,
participants in various programs showed gains in
emotional or cognitive development, better
educational outcomes, increased economic
self-sufficiency, reduced levels of criminal activity, and
improved health-related behaviors. Of course, not
every program produced all these benefits, and not
every child benefited to the same extent. Furthermore,
some researchers argue that less-expensive programs
are just as good as relatively expensive ones, such as
Head Start. Still, the results of the evaluation were
promising, suggesting that the potential benefits of
early intervention can be substantial.
Not everyone agrees that programs that seek to
enhance academic skills during the preschool years
are a good thing. In fact, according to developmental
psychologist David Elkind , United States society tends
to push children so rapidly that they begin to feel
stress and pressure at a young age. Elkind argues that
academic success is largely dependent upon factors
out of parents 'control, such as inherited abilities and
a child's rate of maturation. Consequently, children of
a particular age cannot be expected to master
educational material without taking into account their
current level of cognitive development. In short,
children require development appropriate educational
practice, which is education that is based on both
typical development and the unique characteristics of
a given child.
Not everyone agrees that programs that seek to enhance academic skills during the preschool years are a good
thing.
In fact, according to developmental psychologist David Elkind, United States society tends to push children
so rapidly that they begin to feel stress and pressure at a young age. Elkind argues that academic success is
largely dependent upon factors out of parents 'control, such as inherited abilities and a child 's rate of
maturation. Consequently, children of a particular age cannot be expected to master educational material
without taking into account their current level of cognitive development. In short, children require development
appropriate educational practice, which is education that is based on both typical development and the unique
characteristics of a given child.
9.Look at the squares [ ] that indicate where following sentence can be added to the passage. Where would the
sentence best fit?
According to Elkind, not only does this cause the child emotional distress, it also fails to bring the intended
cognitive gains.
10.Prose Summary. Preschool programs provide opportunities for young children to develop socially, emotionally,
and cognitively.
Answer Choices
A.In addition to stressing academic development, preschools should be enjoyable, since studies show that
children benefit from programs they find fun.
B.Preschool programs such as Head Start have been shown to help prepare children for school and may also have
long-term benefits in helping children become effective adults.
C.Studies have shown that preschool programs are most effective when they focus on only one area of
development rather than trying to serve the “whole child ”.
D.The primary purpose of preschool programs varies by country, with some stressing the importance of group
experience, and others self-reliance or getting a good academic start.
E.Critics of preschool programs argue that these programs put undue pressure on children and may not be
effective if children are not developmentally ready for academic work.
F.David Elkind is a critic of publicly funded preschool programs, arguing that the parent cannot control their
children's emotional development.
TPO31-3 Savanna Formation
1.In paragraph 2, the author  mentions savannas in 
Central America,  Brazil, and the island of Trinidad in 
order  to
A.Argue  that these  savannas are similar  to those in 
South America and Cuba
B.Point  out exceptions to the pattern of savanna  
formation in areas with drought  stress
C.Provides additional  examples of savannas in areas 
with five- to eight-month wet seasons
D.Indicate  areas  where  savannas  are being  gradually  
replaced  by rain forests
3.According to paragraph 3, rain forests and savannas 
differ in that  D
A.The soils in rain forests contain fewer minerals than 
savanna soils do
B.Savannas affect soil conditions more than rain forests 
do
C.Unlike rain forests, savannas prefer sandy, well-
drained soils to soils that are very wet
D.Unlike rain forests, savannas may develop under both 
very dry and very wet soil conditions
Located in tropical areas at low altitudes, savannas are
stable ecosystems, some wet and some dry consisting
of vast grasslands with scattered trees and shrubs.
They occur on a wide range of soil types and in
extremes of climate. There is no simple or single factor
that determines if a given site will be a savanna, but
some factors seem to play important roles in their
formation.
Savannas typically experience a rather prolonged dry
season. One theory behind savanna formation is that
wet forest species are unable to withstand the dry
season, and thus savanna, rather than rain forest, is
favored on the site. Savannas experience an annual
rainfall of between 1,000 and 2,000 millimeters, most
of it falling in a five- to eight-month wet season.
Though plenty of rain may fall on a savanna during the
year, for at least part of the year little does, creating
the drought stress ultimately favoring grasses. Such
conditions prevail throughout much of northern South
America and Cuba, but many Central American
savannas as well as coastal areas of Brazil and the
island of Trinidad do not fit this pattern . In these
areas, rainfall per month exceeds that in the above
definition, so other factors must contribute to savanna
formation.
In many characteristics, savanna soils are similar to
those of some rain forests, though more extreme. For
example, savanna soils, like many rain forest soils, are
typically oxisols (dominated by certain oxide minerals)
and ultisols (soils containing no calcium carbonate),with a high acidity and notably low concentrations of
such minerals as phosphorus, calcium, magnesium,
and potassium, while aluminum levels are high. Some
savannas occur on wet, waterlogged soils; others on
dry, sandy, well-drained soils. This may seem
contradictory, but it only means that extreme soil
conditions, either too wet or too dry for forests, are
satisfactory for savannas. More moderate conditions
support moist forests.
3.The word “notably” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Similarly
B.Especially
C.Usually
D.Relatively
4.According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
true of waterlogged soils?
A.Their upper layers are usually sandy and porous.
B.They cannot support savannas.
C.They contain little oxygen.
D.They are prone to the leaching of nutrients and
minerals.
5.The fact that “poor  soils  can and do support  lush rain 
forest”  suggests that
A.Poor  soils alone  may  not be enough to explain why 
an area becomes a savanna
B.Rain forest  vegetation can significantly  lower  the 
quality  of soils
C.Drought  stress is the single  most  important  factor  in 
savanna formation
D.Minerals are more  important  than moisture  for the 
growth of trees
Waterlogged soils occur in areas that are flat or have
poor drainage. These soils usually contain large
amounts of clay and easily become water saturated.
Air cannot penetrate between the soil particles,
making the soil oxygen-poor. By contrast, dry soils are
sandy and porous, their coarse textures permitting
water to drain rapidly. Sandy soils are prone to the
leaching of nutrients and minerals and so tend to be
nutritionally poor. Though most savannas are found on
sites with poor soils (because of either moistureconditions or nutrient levels of both), poor soils can
and do support lush rain forest.
6.Which of the sentence below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Rain forest species seem unable to adapt to fires
created by humans.
B.Ancient charcoal remains suggest that, prior to the
arrival of humans, fires occurred frequently in rain
forests.
C.Ancient charcoal remains in Amazon forests suggest
that rain forest species adapted to the area long
before the arrival of humans.
D.Rain forests species appear unable to adapt to
frequent fires, but evidence from the past suggests
that rain forests sometimes do burn.
7.Paragraph 5 supports which of the following
statements regarding the importance of fires in
maintaining savannas? A Fires prevent the growth of
pyrophytes.
B.Fires eliminate some species and thus reduce the
overall diversity of the ecosystem.
C.Fires that occur once every two years are unlikely to
help maintain savannas.
D.Fires prevent some species from eliminating other
species with which they compete.
Most savannas probably experience mild fires
frequently and major burns every two years or so.
Many savanna and dry-forest plant species are called
pyrophytes, meaning they are adapted in various waysto withstand occasional burning. Frequent fire is a
factor to which rain forest species seem unable to
adapt, although ancient charcoal remains from
Amazon forest soils dating prior to the arrival of
humans suggest that moist forests also occasionally
burn . Experiments suggest that if fire did not occur in
savannas in the Americas, species composition would
change significantly. When burning occurs, it prevents
competition among plant species from progressing to
the point where some species exclude others,
reducing the overall diversity of the ecosystem. But in
experimental areas protected from fire, a few
perennial grass species eventually come to dominate,
outcompeting all others. Evidence from other studiessuggests that exclusion of fire results in markedly
decreased plant-species richness, often with an
increase in tree density. There is generally little doubt
that fire is a significant factor in maintaining savanna,
certainly in most regions.
8.According to paragraph 6, human activity affects
soils in all of the following ways EXCEPT
A.Decomposition of leaves occurs too fast for surface
roots to obtain nutrients.
B.Nutrients are not recycled.
C.Humus is destroyed.
D.Certain soils become unable to support vegetation
other than savanna vegetation.
On certain sites, particularly in South America,
savanna formation seems related to frequent cutting
and burning of moist forests for pastureland. Increasein pastureland and subsequent overgrazing have
resulted in an expansion of savanna. The thin thin
upper layer of humus (decayed organic matter) is
destroyed by cutting and burning. Humus is necessary
for rapid decomposition of leaves by bacteria and
fungi and for recycling by surface roots. Once the
humus layer disappears, nutrients cannot be recycled
and leach from the soil, converting soil from fertile to
infertile and making it suitable only for savanna
vegetation. Forests on white, sandy soil are most
susceptible to permanent alteration.
Most savannas probably experience mild fires frequently and major burns every two years or so. Many savanna
and dry-forest plant species are called pyrophytes, meaning they are adapted in various ways to withstand
occasional burning. Frequent fire is a factor to which rain forest species seem unable to adapt, although ancient
charcoal remains from Amazon forest soils dating prior to the arrival of humans suggest that moist forests also
occasionally burn. Experiments suggest that if fire did not occur in savannas in the Americas, species composition
would change significantly. When burning occurs, it prevents competition among plant species from progressing
to the point where some species exclude others, reducing the overall diversity of the ecosystem. But in
experimental areas protected from fire, a few perennial grass species eventually come to dominate, outcompeting
all others. Evidence from other studies suggests that exclusion of fire results in markedly decreased plant-species
richness, often with an increase in tree density. There is generally little doubt that fire is a significant factor in
maintaining savanna, certainly in most regions.
On certain sites, particularly in South America, savanna formation seems related to frequent cutting and burning
of moist forests for pastureland. Increase in pastureland and subsequent overgrazing have resulted in an
expansion of savanna. The thin thin upper layer of humus (decayed organic matter) is destroyed by cutting and
burning. Humus is necessary for rapid decomposition of leaves by bacteria and fungi and for recycling by surface
roots. Once the humus layer disappears, nutrients cannot be recycled and leach from the soil, converting soil from
fertile to infertile and making it suitable only for savanna vegetation. Forests on white, sandy soil are most
susceptible to permanent alteration.
9.Look at the four squares [] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
In addition, humans have contributed to the conditions favoring the formation of savannas.
10.Prose Summary. Several factors seem to play important roles in savanna formation.
Answer Choices.
A.Savannas can form in areas with a five- to eight-month wet season, but they more commonly have a longer wet
season.
B.Soil stress caused by drought, extreme moisture, or low nutrient levels favors the formation of savannas.
C.Studies conducted in various regions indicate that an upper layer of white, sandy, soil is present in most
permanent savannas.
D.Drought stress affects trees and shrubs in savannas far less than it affects savanna grasses
E.Frequent fires is a major factor contributing to the formation and maintenance of savannas.
F.In some areas, human cutting and burning is associated with savanna formation, and increase in pastureland has
led to savanna expansion.
TPO32
TPO32-1 Plant Colonization
1.According to paragraph 1, how does disturbance of a
site influence its colonization by a plant species?
A.Disturbance reduces or eliminates competition by
other species.
B.Disturbance increases negative interactions with
other organisms on the site.
C.Disturbance prevents a plant species from colonizing
a new site.
D.Disturbance reduces the fertility of a site.
2.Why does the author mention a plowed field and a
construction site in the passage?
A.To argue that sites that have been affected by
human activity tend to be colonized slowly
B.To illustrate the kind of sites that may be invaded by
weeds
C.To contrast sites in terms of their suitability for
colonization
D.To explain that exposing or compacting the soil
results in successful colonization
Colonization is one way in which plants can change
the ecology of a site. Colonization is a process with
two components: invasion and survival. The rate at
which a site is colonized by plants depends on both
the rate at which individual organisms (seeds, spores,
immature or mature individuals) arrive at the site and
their success at becoming established and surviving.
Success in colonization depends to a great extent on
there being a site available for colonization – a safe
site where disturbance by fire or by cutting down of
trees has either removed competing species or
reduced levels of competition and other negative
interactions to a level at which the invading species
can become established. For a given rate of invasion,
colonization of a moist, fertile site is likely to be much
more rapid than that of a dry, infertile site because of
poor survival on the latter. A fertile, plowed field is
rapidly invaded by a large variety of weeds, whereas a
neighboring construction site from which the soil has
been compacted or removed to expose a coarse,infertile parent material may remain virtually free of
vegetation for many months or even years despite
receiving the same input of seeds as the plowed field.
3.What can be inferred from paragraph 3 about the
reason that large seeds are dispersed by birds or small
animals rather than by wind?
A.Large seeds are easier for birds and animals to see
than are the small seeds dispersed by the wind.
B.Large seeds are too heavy for the wind to disperse.
C.Large seeds cannot be eaten by birds and animals.
D.Large seeds are short-lived and thus require a more
efficient means of dispersal than small seeds do.
4.The phrase “the latter adaptation” in the passage
refers to
A.producing fewer seeds
B.producing larger seeds
C.dispersal by birds and small mammals
D.producing long-lived seeds
5.The word “viable” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.able to survive
B.individual
C.large
D.remaining
Both the rate of invasion and the rate of extinction
vary greatly among different plant species. Pioneer
species – those that occur only in the earliest stages
of colonization – tend to have high rates of invasion
because they produce very large numbers of
reproductive propagules (seeds, spores, and so on)
and because they have an efficient means of
dispersal (normally, wind)
If colonizers produce short-lived reproductive
propagules, then they must produce very large
numbers unless they have an efficient means of
dispersal to suitable new habitats. Many plants
depend on wind for dispersal and produce abundant
quantities of small, relatively short-lived seeds to
compensate for the fact that wind is not always a
reliable means of reaching the appropriate type of
habitat. Alternative strategies have evolved in some
plants, such as those that produce fewer but larger
seeds that are dispersed to suitable sites by birds or
small mammals or those that produce long-lived seeds.
Many forest plants seem to exhibit the latter
adaptation , and viable seeds of pioneer species can
be found in large numbers on some forest floors. For
example, as many as 1,125 viable seeds per square
meter were found in a 100-year-old Douglas
fir/western hemlock forest in coastal British Columbia.
Nearly all the seeds that had germinated from this
seed bank were from pioneer species. The rapid
colonization of such sites after disturbance is
undoubtedly in part a reflection of the large seed bank
on the forest floor.
6.The example of the 100-year-old Douglas fir/western
hemlock forest in paragraph to illustrates which of the
following ideas?
A.It is uncommon for older seed to germinate.
B.Pioneer species tend to prefer forest floors for
colonization purposes.
C.Long-lived seeds of pioneer species can successfully
germinate over long periods of time.
D.Coastal British Columbia is particularly suited for
pioneer species to develop.
7.According to paragraph 4, how do plants manage to
germinate in areas with great climatic diversity and
climatic extremes?
A.By producing seeds only during favorable climatic
conditions
B.By generating large numbers of seeds
C.By colonizing only those areas where other plants
have survived
D.By producing seeds that have a wide range of
germination dates
8.According to paragraph 5, which of the following
determines the sequence in which plant species will
colonize a site?
A.The extent of growth of a species on a prior site
before it begins to colonize a secondary site
B.The differences in invasion and growth rates across
species
C.The degree of fertility of a site
D.The kind of disturbance that the site has undergone
An adaptation that is well developed in colonizing
species is a high degree of variation in germination
(the beginning of a seed 's growth). Seeds of a given
species exhibit a wide range of germination dates,
increasing the probability that at least some of the
seeds will germinate during a period of favorable
environmental conditions. This is particularly
important for species that colonize an environment
where there is no existing vegetation to ameliorate
climatic extremes and in which there may be great
climatic diversity.
Species succession in plant communities, i.e., the
temporal sequence of appearance and disappearance
of species is dependent on events occurring at
different stages in the life history of a species.
Variation in rates of invasion and growth plays an
important role in determining patterns of succession,
especially secondary succession. The species that are
first to colonize a site are those that produceabundant seed that is distributed successfully to new
sites. Such species generally grow rapidly and quickly
dominate new sites, excluding other species with
lower invasion and growth rates. The first community
that occupies a disturbed area therefore may be
composed of species with the highest rate of invasion,
whereas the community of the subsequent stage may
consist of plants with similar survival rates but lower
invasion rates.
442Species succession in plant communities, i.e., the temporal sequence of appearance and disappearance of species
is dependent on events occurring at different stages in the life history of a species. Variation in rates of invasion
and growth plays an important role in determining patterns of succession, especially secondary succession. The
species that are first to colonize a site are those that produce abundant seed that is distributed successfully to
new sites. Such species generally grow rapidly and quickly dominate new sites, excluding other species with
lower invasion and growth rates. The first community that occupies a disturbed area therefore may be composed
of species with the highest rate of invasion, whereas the community of the subsequent stage may consist of plants
with similar survival rates but lower invasion rates. 
9.Look at the four squares [] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
They require relatively little protection or nutrients.
Where does the sentence.
10.Prose Summary. The ecology of a site is changed through its colonization by new plants that arrive and grow
there.
Answer Choices
A.The species that first colonize a disturbed site are typically ones that produce a large number of efficiently
dispersed seeds.
B.Plants that cannot successfully compete with other species can invade and colonize a site only if it is fertile and
moist, such as a plowed field
C.Pioneer species arrive at a site first but have lower survival rates than do species that arrive later.
D.Producing seeds that germinate at various times over long periods allows some plants to colonize sites that only
occasionally present the right conditions for growth.
E.Large, long-lived seeds tend to result in large seed banks with short germination periods requiring favorable
environmental conditions for development.
F.The successive appearance and disappearance of species on a site is a result of variation in species' rates of
invasion, growth, and survival.
TPO32-2 Siam 1851–1910
1.The word “severed” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. cut off
B. viewed
C. protected
D. rescued
2.According to paragraph 2, which of the following
was true of Siam in 1905?
A. Its urban population began to migrate out of the
cities and into the country.
B. Its Central Plain was almost as densely populated as
it is today.
C. It was so rural that wild elephants and tigers
sometimes roamed Bangkok.
D. It had many more villages than it did in the late
1800s.
In the late nineteenth century, political and social
changes were occurring rapidly in Siam (now Thailand).
The old ruling families were being displaced by an
evolving centralized government. These families were
pensioned off (given a sum of money to live on) or
simply had their revenues taken away or restricted;
their sons were enticed away to schools for district
officers, later to be posted in some faraway province;
and the old patron-client relations that had bound
together local societies simply disintegrated. Local
rulers could no longer protect their relatives and
attendants in legal cases, and with the ending in 1905
of the practice of forcing peasant farmers to work
part-time for local rulers, the rulers no longer had a
regular base for relations with rural populations. Theold local ruling families, then, were severed from their
traditional social context.
The same situation viewed from the perspective of the
rural population is even more complex. According to
the government's first census of the rural population,
taken in 1905, there were about thirty thousand
villages in Siam. This was probably a large increase
over the figure even two or three decades earlier,
during the late 1800s. It is difficult to imagine it now,
but Siam's Central Plain in the late 1800s was nowhere
near as densely settled as it is today. There were still
forests closely surrounding Bangkok into the last half
of the nineteenth century, and even at century's end
there were wild elephants and tigers roaming the
countryside only twenty or thirty miles away.
3.The phrase “rice-deficient portions” in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A. the parts that consume rice
B. the parts that do not have enough rice
C. the parts where rice is grown
D. the parts that depend primarily on rice
4.According to paragraph 3, farming families increased
the amount of rice they grew in part by
A. growing varieties of rice that produced greater
yields
B. forming collective farms by joining together with
other farm families
C. planting rice in areas that had previously remained
unplanted
D. hiring laborers to help them tend their fields
5.According to paragraph 4, what happened after the
government ended the practice of requiring rural
people to perform labor for it?
A. Rural people became more closely connected to the
aristocracy.
B. Rural people spent more time growing rice for
profit.
C. The government began to pay the laborers who
grew rice for it.
D. The government introduced a special tax on rice.
Much population movement involved the opening up
of new lands for rice cultivation. Two things made this
possible and encouraged it to happen. First, the
opening of the kingdom to the full force of
international trade by the Bowring Treaty (1855)
rapidly encouraged economic specialization in thegrowing of rice, mainly to feed the rice-deficient
portions of Asia (India and China in particular). The
average annual volume of rice exported from Siam
grew from under 60 million kilograms per year in the
late 1850s to more than 660 million kilograms per year
at the turn of the century; and over the same period
the average price per kilogram doubled. During the
same period, the area planted in rice increased from
about 230,000 acres to more than350,000 acres. This
growth was achieve as the result of the collective
decisions of thousands of peasants families to expand
the amount of land they cultivated, clear and plant
new land, or adopt more intensive methods of
agriculture.
They were able to do so because of our second
consideration. They were relatively freer than they
had been half a century earlier. Over the course of the
Fifth Reign (1868 – 1910), the ties that bound rural
people to the aristocracy and local ruling elites were
greatly reduced. Peasants now paid a tax on
individuals instead of being required to render labor
service to the government. Under these conditions, it
made good sense to thousands of peasant families to
in effect work full-time at what they had been able to
do only part-time previously because of the
requirement to work for the government: grow rice
for the marketplace.
6.Which of the following best describes the
relationship between paragraphs 3 and 4 in the
passage?
A.Paragraph 4 provides further evidence of the
economic growth of Siam discussed in paragraph 3.
B.Paragraph 4 continues the discussion begun in
paragraph 3 of farming improvements that led to
economic growth.
C.Paragraph4 examines a particular effect of the
Bowring Treaty mentioned in paragraph 3.
D.Paragraph 4 discusses the second of two factors that
contributed to the expansion of rice farming
mentioned in paragraph 3.
7.According to paragraph 5, which of the following
was true of Siam's rural people during the Fifth Reign?
A.They were forced to spend most of the profits from
rice growing on registrations required by the
government.
B.Their lives remained very difficult even though
statistics suggest that their quality of life improved.
C.The non-farmers among them were helped by the
government more than the farmers among them
were.
D.They were more prosperous when they were ruled
by local elites than when they were ruled by the more
modern government of the Fifth Reign.
Numerous changes accompanied these developments.
The rural population both dispersed and grew, and
was probably less homogeneous and more mobile
than it had been a generation earlier. The villages
became more vulnerable to arbitrary treatment by
government bureaucrats as local elites now had less
control over them.
By the early twentieth century, as
government modernization in a sense caught up with
what had been happening in the countryside since the
1870s, the government bureaucracy intruded more
and more into village life. Provincial police began to
appear, along with district officers and cattle
registration and land deeds and registration forcompulsory military service. Village handicrafts
diminished or died out completely as people bought
imported consumer goods, like cloth and tools,
instead of making them themselves. More economic
variation took shape in rural villages, as some grew
prosperous from farming while others did not. As well
as can be measured, rural standards of living improved
in the Fifth Reign. But the statistical averages mean
little when measured against the harsh realities of
peasant life.
8.According to paragraph 5, the government
bureaucracy intruded in village life by
A.requiring the people to register their cattle and land
B.requiring the people to buy certain kinds of
imported goods
C.discouraging the people from making handicrafts
and tools
D.encouraging more people to take up farming
They were able to do so because of our second consideration. They were relatively freer than they had been
half a century earlier. Over the course of the Fifth Reign (1868 –1910), the ties that bound rural people to the
aristocracy and local ruling elites were greatly reduced. Peasants now paid a tax on individuals instead of being
required to render labor service to the government. Under these conditions, it made good sense to thousands of
peasant families to in effect work full-time at what they had been able to do only part-time previously because of
the requirement to work for the government: grow rice for the marketplace.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
does the sentence best fit? And yet, how is it that the peasants were able to choose to expand their economic
activity in response to the market opportunitie
10.Prose Summary. During the late nineteenth century, changes in Siam 's power structure had important
economic consequences.
Answer Choices
A.Population movement occurred and rice cultivation intensified because Siam became more actively involved in
international trade.
B.Changes in taxation and the ending of the requirement that people work part-time for the rulers allowed
farmers to produce more rice for the marketplace.
C.Population increases occurred in part because Siam 's farmers were able to produce more rice to feed the
population.
D.Land became so valuable that villagers had to pay the government for the land that they worked on.
E.Although rural living standards may have improved somewhat, prosperity varied from village to village and
government bureaucracy played a greater role in village life.
F.Government modernization in the early twentieth century resulted in the loss of some freedoms that the rural
population had gained from the traditional ruling classes.
TPO32-3 Distributions of Tropical Bee Colonies
1.According to paragraph 3, Hubbell and Johnson
hypothesized that
A.the distribution pattern of bee colonies determines
the degree of aggressiveness the bees display
B.nests of nonaggressive bees have either a random or
a clumped distribution, while nests of aggressive bees
have a regular distribution
C.nests of nonaggressive bees are generally both
closer together and more regularly distributed than
those of aggressive bees
D.nests of aggressive bees tend to be more regular in
shape than those of nonaggressive bees
In 1977 ecologists Stephen Hubbell and Leslie Johnson
recorded a dramatic example of how social
interactions can produce and enforce regular spacing
in a population. They studied competition and nest
spacing in populations of stingless bees in tropical dry
forests in Costa Rica. Though these bees do no sting,rival colonies of some species fight fiercely over
potential nesting sites.
Stingless bees are abundant in tropical and subtropical
environments, where they gather nectar and pollen
from a wide variety of flowers. They generally nest in
trees and live in colonies made up of hundreds to
thousands of workers. Hubbell and Johnson observed
that some species of stingless bees are highly
aggressive to members of their species from other
colonies, while other species are not. Aggressive
species usually forage in groups and feed mainly on
flowers that occur in high-density clumps.
Nonaggressive species feed singly or in small groups
and on more widely distributed flowers.
Hubbell and Johnson studied several species of
stingless bees to determine whether there is a
relationship between aggressiveness and patterns of
colony distribution. They predicted that the colonies
of aggressive species would show regular distributions,
while those of nonaggressive species would show
random or closely grouped (clumped) distribution.
They concentrated their studies on a thirteen-hectare
tract of tropical dry forest that contained numerous
nests of nine species of stingless bees.
2.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The limited number of colonies was not due to the
distribution or availability of potential nesting sites.
B.There was no lack of suitable trees or potential
nesting sites in the study area.
C.The number of nests was directly related to the
number or the distribution of suitable trees.
D.Neither the number nor the distribution of colonies
could be explained by the availability of suitable nest
sites.
3.According to paragraph 5, Hubbell and Johnson
determined A the order in which the colonies in the
study area had been established
B.the level of aggressiveness of each of the nine
species
C.the distribution pattern of the nests of five of the
nine species
D.the number of colonies of each of the nine species
4.Why does the author indicate that “The fifth species
was not aggressive, and its nests were randomly
distributed over the study area”?
A.To identify research results that contradicted
Hubbell and Johnson's original hypothesis
B.To indicate that research results confirmed that nest
Though Hubbell and Johnson were interested in howbee behavior might affect colony distributions, they
recognized that the availability of potential nest sites
for colonies could also affect distributions.
So as one of
the first steps in their study, they mapped the
distributions of trees suitable for nesting. They found
that potential nest trees were distributed randomly
through the study area. They also found that the
number of potential nest sites was much greater than
the number of bee colonies. What did thesemeasurements show the researchers? The number of
colonies in the study area was not limited by
availability of suitable trees, and a clumped or
regular distribution of colonies was not due to an
underlying clumped or regular distribution of
potential nest sites.
Hubbell and Johnson mapped the nests of five of the
nine species of stingless bees accurately, and the nests
of four of these species were distributed regularly. All
four species with regular nest distributions were
highly aggressive to bees from other colonies of their
own species. The fifth species was not aggressive, and
its nests were randomly distributed over the study
area.
449distribution was related to aggressiveness
C.To introduce the hypothesis that, within the same
species, not all colonies are aggressive
D.To point out that both aggressive and nonaggressive
species are equally successful at finding nest sites5The phrase “insights into” in the passage is closest in
meaning to A tools to study
B.opportunities for
C.evidence of
D.an understanding of
6.According to paragraph 6, what is one result of using
pheromones to mark nest sites?
A.The use of pheromones tends to result in nest
clumping.
B.Pheromones attract animals other than bees to
prospective nest sites.
C.Pheromones tend to make bees aggressive.
D.Pheromones secreted by bees of one colony also
attract bees of other colonies.
7.The word “escalated” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.intensified
B.transformed
C.combined
D.lengthened
8.Paragraph 7 supports which of the following ideas
about fights over occupied nests?
A.They are more violent than battles over unoccupied
nest sites.
B.They mostly occur between colonies of different
species.
C.They are more frequent than battles over
unoccupied sites.
D.They last longer than battles over unoccupied sites
do.
The researchers also studied the process by which the
aggressive species establish new colonies. Their
observations provide insights into the mechanisms
that establish and maintain the regular nest
distribution of these species. Aggressive species
apparently mark prospective nest sites with
pheromones, chemical substances secreted by some
animals for communication with other members of
their species. The pheromone secreted by these
stingless bees attracts and aggregates members of
their colony to the prospective nest site; however, it
also attracts workers from other nests.
If workers from two different colonies arrive at the
prospective nest at the same time, they may fight forpossession. Fights may be escalated into protracted
battles.
The researchers observed battles over a nest
tree that lasted for two weeks. Each dawn, fifteen to
thirty workers from two competing colonies arrived at
the contested nest site. The workers from the two
colonies faced off in two swarms and displayed and
fought with each other. In the displays, pairs of bees
faced each other, slowly flew vertically to a height of
about three meters, and then grappled each other to
the ground. When the two bees hit the ground, they
separated, faced off, and performed another aerial
display. Bees did not appear to be injured in these
fights, which were apparently ritualized. The two
swarms abandoned the battle at about 8 or 9 A.M.
each morning, only to re-form and begin again the
next day just after dawn. While this contest over an
unoccupied nest site produced no obvious mortality,
fights over occupied nests sometimes kill over 1,000
bees in a single battle.
450Though Hubbell and Johnson were interested in how bee behavior might affect colony distributions, they
recognized that the availability of potential nest sites for colonies could also affect distributions. So as one of the
first steps in their study, they mapped the distributions of trees suitable for nesting. They found that potential
nest trees were distributed randomly through the study area. They also found that the number of potential nest
sites was much greater than the number of bee colonies. What did these measurements show the researchers?
The number of colonies in the study area was not limited by availability of suitable trees, and a clumped or regular
distribution of colonies was not due to an underlying clumped or regular distribution of potential nest sites.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
does the sentence best fit? For example, a clumped distribution of nests might simply reflect a clumped
distribution of suitable nesting sites.
10.Select from the seven sentences below the three sentences that correctly characterize aggressive species of
stingless bees and the two sentences that correctly characterize nonaggressive species.
Answer Choices
A.Nests are regularly distributed
B.Nests are sometimes located close together
C.Nests always occur in large clumps
D.Colonies are generally made up of fewer than 100 worker
E.Members of a colony feed alone or in small groups
F.Bees feed mainly on flowers that grow in high-density clumps
G.Nest spacing is maintained by fighting
TPO33
TPO33-1 The First Civilizations
1.The phrase “culminated in” in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.reached a high point with
B.logically followed from
C.partly contributed to
D.marked
2.According to paragraph 2, which of the following
statements is true of early farmers?
A.They used farming to supplement other food
sources.
B.They were driven out of small communities.
C.They were victims of flooding.
D.They farmed several plots of land at once.
Evidence suggests that an important stimulus behind
the rise of early civilizations was the development of
settled agriculture, which unleashed a series of
changes in the organization of human communitiesthatculminated in the rise of large ancient empires.
The exact time and place that crops were first
cultivated successfully is uncertain. Many
prehistorians believe that farming may have emerged
in dependently in several different areas of the world
when small communities, driven by increasing
population and a decline in available food resources,
began to plant seeds in the ground in an effort to
guarantee their survival. The first farmers, who mayhave lived as long as 10,000 years ago, undoubtedly
used simple techniques and still relied primarily on
other forms of food production, such as hunting,
foraging, or pastoralism. The real breakthrough took
place when farmers began to cultivate crops along the
floodplains of river systems. The advantage was that
crops grown in such areas were not as dependent on
rainfall and therefore produced a more reliable
harvest. An additional benefit was that the sediment
carried by the river waters deposited nutrients in the
soil, thus enabling the farmer to cultivate a single plot
of ground for many years without moving to a new
location. Thus, the first truly sedentary (that is,
nonmigratory) societies were born. As time went on,
such communities gradually learned how to direct theflow of water to enhance the productive capacity of
the land, while the introduction of the iron plow
eventually led to the cultivation of heavy soils not
previously susceptible to agriculture.
3.The word “provoked” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.secured
B.coordinated
C.modeled
D.brought about
4.According to paragraph 3, which of the following is
NOT a reason why governments first arose among
agricultural communities?
A.A significant increase in population
B.The desire to control water resources for irrigation
C.The need for protection from outside forces
D.The demand for organized communication with
other communities
5.According to paragraph 4, what is not known about
the rise of the first civilizations?
A.Where the first steps toward civilization took place
B.Who was allowed to replace “big men” after the “big
men” died
C.Why some individuals became recognized as leaders
D.How governments emerged
6.What is the relationship between paragraphs 3 and 4
in the passage?
A.Paragraph 3 explains why a need for leadership
arose in early civilizations, and paragraph 4 describes
how that leadership developed.
B.Paragraph 3 suggests that agriculture was first
practiced in Asia and Africa, and paragraph 4 discusses
how it might have later spread to the rest of the
world.
C.Paragraph 3 describes several methods of early
government, and paragraph 4 gives an extended
example of one of them.
D.Paragraph 3 discusses a cause of the spread of river
valley agriculture in early civilizations, and paragraph 4
discusses an effect
The spread of this river valley agriculture in various
parts of Asia and Africa was the decisive factor in the
rise of the first civilizations. The increase in food
production in these regions led to a significant growth
in population, while efforts to control the flow of
water to maximize the irrigation of cultivated areas
and to protect the local inhabitants from hostile forcesoutside the community provoked the first steps
toward cooperative activities on a large scale. The
need to oversee the entire process brought about the
emergence of an elite that was eventually
transformed into a government.
The first clear steps in the rise of the first civilizations
took place in the fourth and third millennia B.C. in
Mesopotamia, northern Africa, India, and China. How
the first governments took shape in these areas is not
certain, but anthropologists studying the evolution of
human communities in various parts of the world have
discovered that one common stage in the process is
the emergence of what are called “big men” within a
single village or a collection of villages. By means of
their military prowess, dominant personalities, or
political talents, these people gradually emerge as the
leaders of that community. In time, the “big men”
become formal symbols of authority and pass on that
authority to others within their own family. As the
communities continue to grow in size and material
wealth, the “big men” assume hereditary status, and
their allies and family members are transformed into a
hereditary monarchy.
7.of the sentences below best expresses the essential
information in the highlighted sentence in the passage?
Incorrect choices change the meaning in important
ways or leave out essential information.
A.Some cities were associated with economic
activities, while others were government or religious
centers.
B.Emerging cities generally served strategic
administrative, economic, and religious purposes.
C.The creation of an economic or administrative
activity led to the emergence of a city for its proper
supervision.
D.Some cities emerged as economic centers and later
became the sites of administrative or religious
activities.
8.Paragraph 5 suggests that which of the following
was a consequence of the emergence of cities?
A.The decentralization of authority
B.An increase in religious activity
C.The emergence of service- and production-related
jobs
D.A decreased reliance on mineral resources
The appearance of these sedentary societies had a
major impact on the social organizations, religious
beliefs, and way of life of the peoples living within
their boundaries. With the increase in population and
the development of centralized authority came theemergence of the cities. While some of these urban
centers were identified with a particular economic
function, such as proximity to gold or iron deposits or
a strategic location on a major trade route, others
served primarily as administrative centers or the site
of temples for the official cult or other ritual
observances. Within these cities, new forms of
livelihood appeared to satisfy the growing need for
social services and consumer goods. Some people
became artisans or merchants, while others became
warriors, scholars, or priests. In some cases, the
physical division within the first cities reflected the
strict hierarchical character of the society as a whole,
with a royal palace surrounded by an imposing wall
and separate from the remainder of the urban
population. In other instances, such as the Indus River
Valley, the cities lacked a royal precinct and the
ostentatious palaces that marked their
contemporaries elsewhere.
454The appearance of these sedentary societies had a major impact on the social organizations, religious beliefs, and
way of life of the peoples living within their boundaries. With the increase in population and the development of
centralized authority came the emergence of the cities. While some of these urban centers were identified with
a particular economic function, such as proximity to gold or iron deposits or a strategic location on a major trade
route, others served primarily as administrative centers or the site of temples for the official cult or other ritual
observances. Within these cities, new forms of livelihood appeared to satisfy the growing need for social
services and consumer goods. Some people became artisans or merchants, while others became warriors,
scholars, or priests. In some cases, the physical division within the first cities reflected the strict hierarchical
character of the society as a whole, with a royal palace surrounded by an imposing wall and separate from the
remainder of the urban population. In other instances, such as the Indus River Valley, the cities lacked a royal
precinct and the ostentatious palaces that marked their contemporaries elsewhere.
9.Look at the four squares [ ▌] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This was accompanied by increased professional specialization.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points. The practice of settled agriculture in some areas
of Asia and Africa was crucial to the development of early civilizations.
Answer Choices
A.Prehistorians disagree as to whether early farmers first cultivated crops along floodplains or first tried cultivating
crops in less successful environments.
B.Cultivation in fertile river valleys resulted in predictable harvests, which meant that farmers no longer needed to
migrate constantly in search of food.
C.Because crops could be cultivated more successfully where farmers were not completely dependent on rainfall,
hostilities between groups arose over control of the river systems.
D.The need to organize the effort to ensure the food supply and defend the land led to the formation of elite
supervising groups that eventually became the first governments.
E.Increasingly centralized forms of administration resulted in the emergence of social classes and in the
development of cities as trade, administration, or religious centers.
F.Unlike other early civilizations, those that developed in the Indus River Valley did not have any spectacular
palaces or areas for exclusive use by the authorities.
TPO33-2 Railroads and Commercial Agriculture in
Nineteenth-Century United States
1.According to paragraph 1, each of the following is
true about railroad track in the United States EXCEPT
A.In 1850 the United States had less than 10,000 miles
of railroad track.
B.By the end of the 1850s, Ohio and Illinois contained
more railroad track than any other state in the
country.
C.Much of the railroad track built in the United States
during the 1850s was located west of the Appalachian
Mountain.
D.By 1860 there were more miles of railroad track in
the United States than in any other country.
2.It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that the new
railroads had which of the following effects on farm
communities?
A.Most new farms were located along the tracks.
B.Farmers began to grow wheat as a commercial corp.
C.Many farmer decided to grow a wider variety of
crops.
D.Demand for manufactured goods increased among
famers.
By 1850 the United States possessed roughly 9,000
miles of railroad track; ten years later it had over
30,000 miles, more than the rest of the world
combined. Much of the new construction during the
1850s occurred west of the Appalachian Mountains –
over 2,000 miles in the states of Ohio and Illinois
alone.
The effect of the new railroad lines rippled outward
through the economy. Farmers along the tracks began
to specialize in corps that they could market in distant
locations. With their profits they purchased
manufactured goods that earlier they might have
made at home. Before the railroad reached Tennessee,
the state produced about 25,000 bushels (or 640 tons)
of wheat, which sold for less than 50 cents a bushel.
Once the railroad came, farmers in the same counties
grew 400,000 bushels (over 10,000 tons) and sold
their crop at a dollar a bushel.
3.The word “bustling” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.famous
B.important
C.growing
D.busy
4.According to paragraph 3, in what way did the new
rail networks change western trade?
A.Northwestern farmers almost completely stopped
shipping goods by steamboat.
B.Many western goods began to be shipped east by
way of Chicago rather than south to New Orleans.
C.Chicago largely replaced New York and other eastern
cities as the final market for goods for the West.
D.The value of goods shipped west soon became
greater than the value of goods shipped east.
5.According to paragraph 3, what was a disadvantage
of shipping goods from northwestern areas to New
Orleans?
A.There was no reliable way to get goods from New
Orleans to eastern cities.
B.The cost of shipping goods by river to New Orleans
continued to increase.
C.Goods shipped from New Orleans' neighboring
areas had a significant competitive advantage because
of their lower transportation costs.
D.The temperatures and humidity.
6.Paragraph 4 supports the idea that the price of
wheat more than doubled between 1845 and 1855
because
A.the price of corn nearly doubled during that same
period
B.Demand for grain increased sharply outside the
United States
C.Farmers in the Northeast and Midwest began to
specialize in cash crops
D.many farmers had borrowed heavily to purchase
land and equipment for raising wheat
The new railroad networks shifted the direction of
western trade. In 1840 most northwestern grain was
shipped south down the Mississippi River to thebustling port of New Orleans. But low water made
steamboat travel hazardous in summer, and ice shut
down traffic in winter. Products such as lard, tallow,
and cheese quickly spoiled if stored in New Orleans'
hot and humid warehouses. Increasingly, traffic from
the Midwest flowed west to east, over the new rail
lines. Chicago became the region's hub, linking the
farms of the upper Midwest to New York and other
eastern cities by more than 2,000 miles of track in
5. Thus while the value of goods shipped by river
to New Orleans continued to increase, the South's
overall share of western trade dropped dramatically.
A.sharp rise in demand for grain abroad also
encouraged farmers in the Northeast and Midwest to
become more commercially oriented. Wheat, which in
1845 commanded $1.08 a bushel in New York City,
fetched $2.46 in 1855; in similar fashion the price of
corn nearly doubled. Farmers responded by
specializing in cash crops, borrowing to purchase more
land, and investing in equipment to increase
productivity.
7.Why does author point out that “Indian grass,
Canada wild rye, and native big bluestem all grew
higher than a person”? A To provide a reason why
people from the eastern woodlands of the United
States were impressed when they saw the prairie
B.To identify an obstacles to the development of the
railroad lines fanning out from Chicago
C.To explain why the transformation of the prairies by
commercial agriculture was so remarkable
D.To provide evidence supporting the claim that the
prairies had fertile, deep black soil
11.The word “surpluses” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.extra goods
B.commercial goods
C.unprocessed goods
D.transportable goods
As railroad lines fanned out from Chicago, farmers
began to acquire open prairie land in Illinois and then
Iowa, putting the fertile, deep black soil into
production.
Commercial agriculture transformed this
remarkable treeless environment. To settlers
accustomed to eastern woodlands, the thousands of
square miles of tall grass were an awesome sight.
Indian grass, Canada wild rye, and native big
bluestem all grew higher than a person. Because
eastern plows could not penetrate the densely tangled
roots of prairie grass, the earliest settlers erected
farms along the boundary separating the forest from
the prairie. In 1837, however, John Deere patented a
sharp-cutting steel plow that sliced through the sod
without soil sticking to the blade. Cyrus Mc
Cormick
refined a mechanical reaper that harvested fourteen
times more wheat with the same amount of labor. By
the 1850s Mc
Cormick was selling 1,000 reapers a year
and could not keep up with demand, while Deere
turned out 10,000 plows annually.
The new commercial farming fundamentally altered
the Midwestern landscape and the environment.
Native Americans had grown corn in the region for
years, but never in such large fields as did later settlerswho became farmers, whose surpluses were shipped
east. Prairie farmers also introduced new crops that
were not part of the earlier ecological system, notably
wheat, along with fruits and vegetables.
8.According to paragraph 8, prairie farmers changed
the landscape by doing all of the following EXCEPT
A.Reducing annual fires
B.Dividing the land into large, regularly-shaped lots
C.Planting trees that eventually formed woodlots
D.Fencing off their farms
Native grasses were replaced by a small number of
plants cultivated as commodities. Corn had the best
yields, but it was primarily used to feed livestock.
Because bread played a key role in the American and
European diet, wheat became the major cash crop.
Tame grasses replaced native grasses in pastures for
making hay.
Western farmers altered the landscape by reducing
the annual fires that had kept the prairie free from
trees. In the absence of these fires, trees reappeared
on land not in cultivation and, if undisturbed,
eventually formed woodlots. The earlier unbroken
landscape gave way to independent farms, each
fenced off in a precise checkerboard pattern. It was an
artificial ecosystem of animals, woodlots, and crops,
whose large, uniform layout made western farms
more efficient than the more-irregular farms in the
East.
The new railroad networks shifted the direction of western trade. In 1840 most northwestern grain was shipped
south down the Mississippi River to the bustling port of New Orleans. But low water made steamboat travel
hazardous in summer, and ice shut down traffic in winter. Products such as lard, tallow, and cheese quickly
spoiled if stored in New Orleans' hot and humid warehouses. Increasingly, traffic from the Midwest flowed west
to east, over the new rail lines. Chicago became the region's hub, linking the farms of the upper Midwest to New
York and other eastern cities by more than 2,000 miles of track in 1855. Thus while the value of goods shipped by
river to New Orleans continued to increase, the South's overall share of western trade dropped dramatically.
9Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
The problems were not limited to routes of transport.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage of the passage is provided below.
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the
passage. Some answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented
in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points.
The huge expansion of rail lines
in Midwestern United States during the 185os had major economic and environmental effects. Answer Choices
A.Construction of new rail lines into the Midwest had been effectively stopped by the Appalachian Mountains, but
by 1850 improved construction technology had made further advances possible.
B.Rail lines to Chicago and on to the East made it easier to get Midwestern goods to distant markets, while
growing demand encouraged crop specialization and led to higher crop prices.
C.Because of the growing volume of traffic coming by rail from the Northeast and Midwest, the value of goods
arriving in New Orleans for shipment to markets abroad increased dramatically.
D.Access to rail lines combined with the development of more-efficient farming equipment allowed e fertile land
of the open prairies to be used for large-scale commercial agriculture.
E.Reduction of annual prairie fires allowed trees to reappear, and native grasses were replaced by a few
commercially grown plants as previously unbroken grasslands were divided into large fenced fields.
F.Native Americans had grown corn on the prairies for years but had not produced large surpluses because the
varieties they planted had far poorer yields than those introduced by commercial farmers.
TPO33-3 Extinction Episodes of the Past
1.Paragraph 1 supports which of the following
statements about life on Earth before the Cambrian
period? A Biodiversity levels were steady, as
indicated by the fossil record.
B.Levels of biodiversity could not be tracked.
C.The most dramatic extinction episode occurred.
D.Few microscopic species existed.
It was not until the Cambrian period, beginning about
600 million years ago, that a great proliferation of
macroscopic species occurred on Earth and produced
a fossil record that allows us to track the rise and fall
of biodiversity. Since the Cambrian period, biodiversity
has generally risen, but there have been some notable
exceptions. Biodiversity collapsed dramatically during
at least five periods because of mass extinctions
around the globe. The five major mass extinctions
receive most of the attention, but they are only one
end of a spectrum of extinction events.
Collectively,
more species went extinct during smaller events that
were less dramatic but more frequent. The best
known of the five major extinction events, the one
that saw the demise of the dinosaurs, is the
Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction
2.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The dominance of dinosaurs came to an end 65
million years ago, at which time mammals began to
flourish and diversify.
B.Because no group of species can remain dominant
forever, mammals became the dominant group when
dinosaurs became extinct.
C.After being the dominant group for more than 200
million years, the age of dinosaurs came to a dramatic
end 65 million years ago.
D.The diverse group of mammals that we know today,
including bats and whales, evolved from small
terrestrial forms that had been dominated by
dinosaurs.
3.According to paragraph 2, why are dinosaurs
popularly said to have “ruled Earth” during the
Cretaceous period?
A.Dinosaurs were the only species of reptile that
existed during the whole of the Cretaceous period.
B.Dinosaurs won the battle for food resources over
mammals during the Cretaceous period.
C.Dinosaurs survived extinction during the Cretaceous
period, whereas many other animal species did not.
D.Dinosaurs were the physically and ecologically
dominant animals during the Cretaceous period.
4.According to paragraph 2, which of the following
species initially increased in number at the K-T
boundary?
A.Dinosaurs
B.Foraminifera
C.Ferns
D.Ammonoid mollusks
Starting about 280 million years ago, reptiles were the
dominant large animals in terrestrial environments. In
popular language this was the era “when dinosaurs
ruled Earth,” when a wide variety of reptile speciesoccupying many ecological niches. However, no group
or species can maintain its dominance indefinitely,
and when, after over 200 million years, the age of
dinosaurs came to a dramatic end about 65 million
years ago, mammals began to flourish, evolving from
relatively few types of small terrestrial animals into
the myriad of diverse species, including bats and
whales, that we know today. Paleontologists label this
point in Earth's history as the end of the Cretaceous
period and the beginning of the Tertiary period, often
abbreviated as the K-T boundary. This time was also
marked by changes in many other types of organisms.
Overall, about 38 percent of the families of marine
animals were lost, with percentages much higher in
some groups Ammonoid mollusks went from being
very diverse and abundant to being extinct. An
extremely abundant set of planktonic marine animals
called foraminifera largely disappeared, although they
rebounded later. Among plants, the K-T boundary saw
a sharp but brief rise in the abundance of primitive
vascular plants such as ferns, club mosses, horsetails,
and conifers and other gymnosperms. The number of
flowering plants (angiosperms) was reduced at this
time, but they then began to increase dramatically.
5.Why does the author note that “even endotherms
can be affected by a significant change in the climate”?
A.To argue that there was a significant climate at the
time that endothermic dinosaurs became extinct
B.To argue that climate change caused some dinosaurs
to evolve as endotherms
C.To support the view that at least some of the
dinosaurs that became extinct were endotherms
D.To defend climate change as possible explanation for
the extinction of dinosaurs
6.According to paragraph 4, all of the following
contributed to the massive extinctions of the K-T
period EXCEPT
A.tidal waves
B.fires
C.insufficient solar radiation
D.iridium
7.According to paragraph 4, which of the following
statements explains the importance of the discovery
of high levels of iridium rocks?
A.It provided evidence that overexposure to solar
radiation led to the K-T extinction.
What caused these changes? For many years scientists
assumed that a cooling of the climate was responsible,
with dinosaurs being particularly vulnerable because,
like modern reptiles, they were ectothermic
(dependent on environmental heat, or cold-blooded).
It is now widely believed that at least some species of
dinosaurs had a metabolic rate high enough for them
to be endotherms (animals that maintain a relatively
consistent body temperature by generating heat
internally). Nevertheless, climatic explanations for the
K-T extinction are not really challenged by the ideas
that dinosaurs may have been endothermic, becauseeven endotherms can be affected by a significant
change in the climate.
Explanations for the K-T extinction were
revolutionized in 1980 when a group of physical
scientists led by Luis Alvarez proposed that 65 million
years ago Earth was stuck by a 10-kilometer-wide
meteorite traveling at 90,000 kilometers per hour.
They believed that this impact generated a thick cloud
of dust that enveloped Earth, shutting out much of the
incoming solar radiation and reducing plant
photosynthesis to very low levels. Short-term effects
might have included huge tidal waves and extensive
fires. In other words, a series of events arising from a
single cataclysmic event caused the massive
extinctions. Initially, the meteorite theory was based
on a single line of evidence. At locations around the
globe, geologists had found an unusually high
concentration of iridium in the layer of sedimentary
rocks that was formed about 65 million years ago.
Iridium is an element that is usually uncommon near
Earth's surface, but it is abundant in some
meteorites.
Therefore, Alvarez and his colleagues
concluded that it was likely that the iridium in
sedimentary rocks deposited at the K-T boundary had
originated in a giant meteorite or asteroid. Most
scientist came to accept the meteorite theory after
evidence came to light that a circular formation, 180
kilometers in diameter and centered on the north
coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, was created by a
meteorite impact about 65 million years ago.
463B It showed that more than one cataclysmic event was
responsible for the K-T extinction.
C.It suggested that the cause of the K-T extinction may
have been a meteorite striking Earth.
D.It provided evidence that the K-T extinction
occurred 65 million years ago.
8.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 4 about the meteorite theory?
A.The data originally presented as evidence for the
theory were eventually rejected.
B.Many scientists did not accept it when it was first
proposed.
C.It has not been widely accepted as an explanation
for the K-T extinction.
D.Alvarez subsequently revised it after a circular
formation was found in the Yucatan Peninsula.
464Explanations for the K-T extinction were revolutionized in 1980 when a group of physical scientists led by Luis
Alvarez proposed that 65 million years ago Earth was stuck by a 10-kilometer-wide meteorite traveling at 90,000
kilometers per hour. They believed that this impact generated a thick cloud of dust that enveloped Earth, shutting
out much of the incoming solar radiation and reducing plant photosynthesis to very low levels. Short-term effects
might have included huge tidal waves and extensive fires. In other words, a series of events arising from a single
cataclysmic event caused the massive extinctions. Initially, the meteorite theory was based on a single line of
evidence. At locations around the globe, geologists had found an unusually high concentration of iridium in the
layer of sedimentary rocks that was formed about 65 million years ago. Iridium is an element that is usually
uncommon near Earth's surface, but it is abundant in some meteorites. Therefore, Alvarez and his colleagues
concluded that it was likely that the iridium in sedimentary rocks deposited at the K-T boundary had originated in
a giant meteorite or asteroid. Most scientist came to accept the meteorite theory after evidence came to light that
a circular formation, 180 kilometers in diameter and centered on the north coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, was
created by a meteorite impact about 65 million years ago.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit?
This focused on the chemical composition of ancient rocks.
10.Prose Summary. The K-T extinction 65 million years ago is the best known of the five major extinction episodes
since the Cambrian period.
Answer Choices
A.Collectively, the five major extinction episodes resulted in the elimination of a larger number of species than did
all the minor extinction events.
B. The K-T extinction eliminated the dinosaurs and ammonoid mollusks but was followed by the diversification of
mammals and gymnospermous plants.
C. An extreme cooling of the climate could not have caused the K-T extinction of dinosaurs, because, while most
dinosaurs depended on environmental heat, some did not.
D. The K-T extinction of the dinosaurs is the only mass extinction that has been explained by the impact of a
meteorite.
E. In 1980 Luis Alvarez proposed that the K-T extinction was caused by ecological disasters brought about by the
impact of a meteorite striking Earth.
F. A high concentration of iridium in sedimentary rocks at the K-T boundary and a large impact crater in the
Yucatan Peninsula from 65 million years ago strongly support Alvarez 'hypothesis.
TPO34
TPO34-1 Islamic Art and the Book
1.Paragraph 1 makes all of the following points about
Islamic books EXCEPT
A.Books were an important form of artistic expression.
B.A wide variety of books with different styles and
topics became available.
C.They were sold primarily near mosques.
D.Most books were intended for sale on the open
market.
2.The word “adjacent” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.major
B.nearby
C.ancient
D.well-known
3.According to paragraph 1, before A.D. 900, books in
the Islamic world
A.included a wide range of subjects
B.did not contain any calligraphy or decoration
C.used rounded scripts
D.were usually written on parchment
4.In paragraph 1, why does the author mention the
fact that the mosque in Marrakech, Morocco, is known
as the Booksellers' Mosque
A.To cast doubt on the importance of souks in making
books available to common people
B.To provide an example of a place where books were
made at the order of a particular prince
The arts of the Islamic book, such as calligraphy and
decorative drawing, developed during A.D. 900 to
1500, and luxury books are some of the most
characteristic examples of Islamic art produced in this
period. This came about from two major
developments: paper became common, replacing
parchment as the major medium for writing, and
rounded scripts were regularized and perfected so
that they replaced the angular scripts of the previous
period, which because of their angularity were uneven
in height. Books became major vehicles for artistic
expression, and the artists who produced them,
notably calligraphers and painters, enjoyed high status,
and their workshops were often sponsored by princes
and their courts. Before A.D. 900, manuscripts of the
Koran (the book containing the teachings of the
Islamic religion) seem to have been the most common
type of book produced and decorated, but after that
date a wide range of books were produced for a broad
spectrum of patrons. These continued to include, of
course, manuscripts of the Koran, which every Muslim
wanted to read, but scientific works, histories,
romances, and epic and lyric poetry were also copied
in fine handwriting and decorated with beautiful
illustrations. Most were made for sale on the open
market, and cities boasted special souks (markets)
where books were bought and sold. The mosque of
Marrakech in Morocco is known as the Kutubiyya, or
Booksellers' Mosque, after the adjacent market. Some
of the most luxurious books were specific
commissions made at the order of a particular prince
and signed by the calligrapher and decorator.
466C To emphasize how influential and well known the
book markets were
D.To demonstrate the need for religious texts in
Islamic lands
5.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.It was several centuries before papermaking
techniques spread to faraway areas where parchment
was popular and used widely in art.
B.Although papermaking came to Egypt quickly, it took
much longer for paper to be used when copying the
Koran, probably because of the conservative nature of
religious art.
C.Papermaking spread beyond Egypt, Sicily, and Spain,
but it was not widely used by artists for centuries,
probably because of the conservative nature of art in
those countries.
D.Paper replaced parchment in copies of the Koran,
probably at the request of conservative practitioners
in areas like Egypt, Sicily, and Spain.
6.In paragraphs 2 and 3, which of the following is NOT
mentioned as an advantage of paper over parchment?
A.It was harder to erase or change what was written
on paper.
B.More pages of paper could be bound in a single
volume.
C.Paper could be produced in sheets of varying
weights and thicknesses.
D.More people could buy books made of paper
because it was cheaper.
Papermaking had been introduced to the Islamic lands
from China in the eighth century. It has been said that
Chinese papermakers were among the prisoners
captured in a battle fought near Samarqand between
the Chinese and the Muslims in 751, and the
technique of papermaking – in which cellulose pulpextracted from any of several plants is first suspended
in water, caught on a fine screen, and then dried into
flexible sheets – slowly spread westward. Within fifty
years, the government in Baghdad was using paper for
documents. Writing in ink on paper, unlike parchment,
could not easily be erased, and therefore paper had
the advantage that it was difficult to alter what waswritten on it. Papermaking spread quickly to Egypt –
and eventually to Sicily and Spain – but it was several
centuries before paper supplanted parchment for
copies of the Koran, probably because of the
conservative nature of religious art and its
practitioners. In western Islamic lands, parchment
continued to be used for manuscripts of the Koran
throughout this period.
7.Why does the author include the following
information: “At first, paper was made in relatively
small sheets that were pasted together, but by the
beginning of the fourteenth century, very large sheets
– as much as a meter across – were available.”?
A.To provide evidence that the development of
papermaking techniques was very slow
B.To explain why paper was never as cheap as it has
become today
C.To make the point that paper allowed artists to
develop paintings that were more expressive and
complex
D.To prove that paper was more popular with artists
who used large sheets, than it was with book printers,
who used smaller sheets
8.According to paragraph 4, what did Ibn Muqla
achieve around the year 900?
A.He modified a set of formal scripts known as the Six
Pens into rounded scripts appropriate for
correspondence.
B.He created a standardized set of rounded scripts
proportional to the size of the first letter of the
alphabet.
C.He promoted calligraphy as an art form and
encouraged the use of rounded letters in religious
texts.
D.He persuaded the court in Baghdad to use rounded
styles instead of more angular scripts in their
documents.
The introduction of paper spurred a conceptual
revolution whose consequences have barely been
explored. Although paper was never as cheap as it has
become today, it was far less expensive than
parchment, and therefore more people could afford to
buy books, Paper is thinner than parchment, so morepages could be enclosed within a single volume. At
first, paper was made in relatively small sheets that
were pasted together, but by the beginning of the
fourteenth century, very large sheets – as much as a
meter across – were available. These large sheets
meant that calligraphers and artists had more space
on which to work. Paintings became more
complicated, giving the artist greater opportunities to
depict space or emotion. The increased availability of
paper, particularly after 1250, encouraged people to
develop systems of representation, such as
architectural plans and drawings. This in turn allowed
the easy transfer of artistic ideas and motifs over great
distances from one medium to another, and in a
different scale in ways that had been difficult, if not
impossible, in the previous period.
Rounded styles of Arabic handwriting had long been
used for correspondence and documents alongside
the formal angular scripts used for inscriptions and
manuscripts of the Koran. Around the year 900, Ibn
Muqla, who was a secretary and vizier at the Abbasid
court in Baghdad, developed a system of proportioned
writing. He standardized the length of alif, the first
letter of the Arabic alphabet, and then determined
what the size and shape of all other letters should be,
based on the alif. Eventually, six round forms ofhandwriting, composed of three pairs of big and little
scripts known collectively as the Six Pens, became the
standard repertory of every calligrapher.
468Papermaking had been introduced to the Islamic lands from China in the eighth century. It has been said that
Chinese papermakers were among the prisoners captured in a battle fought near Samarqand between the Chinese
and the Muslims in 751, and the technique of papermaking – in which cellulose pulp extracted from any of several
plants is first suspended in water, caught on a fine screen, and then dried into flexible sheets – slowly spread
westward. Within fifty years, the government in Baghdad was using paper for documents. Writing in ink on
paper, unlike parchment, could not easily be erased, and therefore paper had the advantage that it was difficult to
alter what was written on it. Papermaking spread quickly to Egypt – and eventually to Sicily and Spain – but it
was several centuries before paper supplanted parchment for copies of the Koran, probably because of the
conservative nature of religious art and its practitioners. In western Islamic lands, parchment continued to be used
for manuscripts of the Koran throughout this period.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. This
change occurred for good reason.
10.Prose Summary: Islamic books from A.D. 900 to 1500 reflect major changes from the past and important
innovations.
Answer Choices:
A.Books became major vehicle of artistic expression for calligraphers and painters, and the subjects of books
expanded to include more and more kinds of works.
B. The growing luxuriousness of books meant that the market for them was increasingly dominated by the wealthy
and powerful patrons who could afford them.
C. After it was learned from Chinese prisoners, the technique of papermaking spread throughout Islamic lands,
where paper gradually replaced parchment.
D. The high status enjoyed by calligraphers and artists made books extremely popular in the cities where books
were bought and sold.
E. The popularity of books led to major advances in the development and transfer of new artistic ideas.
F. Around the year 900, a set of rounded styles of Arabic handwriting began replacing angular scripts in copying
the manuscripts of the Koran.
TPO34-2 The Development of Steam Power
1.What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about
Britain's short supply of wood in the eighteenth
century?
A.BWood from Britain's great forests was being
exported to other countries for profit.
B.A growing population had required cutting down
forests to increase available land for farming.
C.Larger families required the construction of larger
homes made from wood.
D.What was left of the great forests after the medieval
period was being strictly protected.
2.Select TWO answer choices that, according to
paragraph 1, are true statements about Russia's iron
industry in the eighteenth century. To obtain credit,
you must select TWO answer choices.
A.Russia reached its maximum production of iron at
the same time as Britain.
B.Russia exported much of its iron production to
Britain.
C.Russia's appetite for iron increased rapidly after
D.Russia's energy resources eventually became
insufficient and limited the growth of its iron industry.
3.Why are “beer, glass, soap, and other products”
mentioned in the discussion of Britain's energy?
A.To help explain why the energy crisis was so severe
B.To show that despite the energy crisis and as early
as 1640, London homes were advanced and well
supplied
C.To emphasize that after 1640, British homes
required energy for more than heat
D.To indicate that coal had been used for the
production of certain products before the eighteenth
century
By the eighteenth century, Britain was experiencing a
severe shortage of energy. Because of the growth of
population, most of the great forests of medieval
Britain had long ago been replaced by fields of grain
and hay. Wood was in ever-shorter supply, yet it
remained tremendously important. It served as the
primary source of heat for all homes and industries
and as a basic raw material. Processed wood (charcoal)
was the fuel that was mixed with iron ore in the blast
furnace to produce pig iron (raw iron). The iron
industry's appetite for wood was enormous, and by
1740 the British iron industry was stagnating. Vast
forests enabled Russia to become the world's leading
producer of iron, much of which was exported to
Britain. But Russia's potential for growth was limited
too, and in a few decades Russia would reach the
barrier of inadequate energy that was already holding
England back.
As this early energy crisis grew worse, Britain lookedtoward its abundant and widely scattered reserves of
coal as an alternative to its vanishing wood. Coal was
first used in Britain in the late Middle Ages as a source
of heat. By 1640 most homes in London were heatedwith it, and it also provided heat for making beer,
glass, soap, and other products . Coal was not used,
however, to produce mechanical energy or to power
machinery. It was there that coal's potential wad
enormous.
4.According to paragraph 3, all of the following are
ways in which the Savery and Newcomen engines
were similar EXCEPT
A.Both became relatively inexpensive after the 1770s.
B.Both produced steam by burning coal.
C.Both were used to operate pumps.
D.Both were very inefficient.
5.The word “gifted” in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.independent
B.talented
C.famous
D.ambitious
As more coal was produced, mines were dug deeper
and deeper and were constantly filling with water.
Mechanical pumps, usually powered by hundreds of
horses waling in circles at the surface, had to be
installed. Such power was expensive and bothersome.
In an attempt to overcome these disadvantages,
Thomas Savery in 1698 and Thomas Newcomen in
1705 invented the first primitive steam engines. Both
engines were extremely inefficient. Both burned coal
to produce steam, which was then used to operate a
pump. However, by the early 1770s, many of the
Savery engines and hundreds of the Newcomen
engines were operating successfully, though
inefficiently, in English and Scottish mines.
In the early 1760s, a gifted young Scot named James
Watt was drawn to a critical study of the steam engine.
Watt was employed at the time by the University of
Glasgow as a skilled crafts worker making scientific
instruments. In 1763, Watt was called on to repair a
Newcomen engine being used in a physics course.
After a series of observations, Watt saw that the New
comen's waste of energy could be reduced by adding aseparate condenser. This splendid invention, patented
in 1769, greatly increased the efficiency of the steam
engine. The steam engine of Watt and his followers
was the technological advance that gave people, at
least for a while, unlimited power and allowed the
invention and use of all kinds of power equipment.
6.Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 5 as a development that greatly changed
the production of iron?
A.The use of coke in the smelting of pig iron
B.The invention of a furnace that used coke to refine
iron
C.The discovery of a method for increasing the
production of charcoal
D.The invention of powerful machinery that could
shape, form, and finish iron7.The word “indispensable” in the passage is closest in
meaning to A advantageous
B.essential
C.less costly
D.highly stimulating
8.According to the passage, which of the following is
true about the development of steam power?
A.The steam engine's basic technology can be traced
back to medieval Britain when steam-powered
machinery was being tried in farming activities.
B.Although Russia and Britain developed steam-power
technology simultaneously, Britain was first to try it in
a large-scale industry due to a greater need for iron.
The steam engine was quickly put to use in several
industries in Britain. It drained mines and made
possible the production of ever more coal to feed
steam engines elsewhere. The steam power plant
began to replace waterpower in the cotton-spinning
mills as well as other industries during the 1780s,
contributing to a phenomenal rise in industrialization.
The British iron industry was radically transformed.
The use of powerful, steam-driven bellows in blast
furnaces helped iron makers switch over rapidly from
limited charcoal to unlimited coke (which is made
from coal) in the smelting of pig iron (the process of
refining impure iron) after 1770 in the 1780s, Henry
Cort developed the puddling furnace, which allowed
pig iron to be refined in turn with coke. Cort also
developed heavy-duty, steam-powered rolling mills,
which were capable of producing finished iron in every
shape and form.
The economic consequence of these technical
innovations in steam power was a great boom in the
British iron industry. In 1740 annual British iron
production was only 17,000 tons, but by 1844, with
the spread of coke smelting and the impact of Cort's
inventions, it had increased to 3,000,000 tons. This
was a truly amazing expansion. Once scarce and
expensive, iron became cheap, basic, and
indispensable to the economy.
472C Steam-power technology was largely the result of
improvements developed to increase the supply of
coal as a primary source of energy.
D.Adaptations to steam engines required for their use
in cotton-spinning mills led to radical developments in
machinery used in the iron industry.
By the eighteenth century, Britain was experiencing a severe shortage of energy. Because of the growth of
population, most of the great forests of medieval Britain had long ago been replaced by fields of grain and hay.
Wood was in ever-shorter supply, yet it remained tremendously important. It served as the primary source of
heat for all homes and industries and as a basic raw material. Processed wood (charcoal) was the fuel that was
mixed with iron ore in the blast furnace to produce pig iron (raw iron). The iron industry's appetite for wood was
enormous, and by 1740 the British iron industry was stagnating. Vast forests enabled Russia to become the world's
leading producer of iron, much of which was exported to Britain. But Russia's potential for growth was limited too,
and in a few decades Russia would reach the barrier of inadequate energy that was already holding England back.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Energy
had not been a problem for Britain in the past because it relied on a rich source of energy: its vast forests.
10.Prose Summary: By the eighteenth century, Britain was experiencing a severe shortage of energy.
Answer Choices:
A. The development of blast furnaces for the manufacture of pig iron made the Britain less dependent on wood.
B. After the medieval period, both Russia and Britain began to look for alternative sources of energy, such as
steam power, in order to maintain the growth of their iron industries.
C. Two inventors designed the first steam engines in order to overcome the disadvantages of relying on horses to
power the pumps used in mining coal.
D. James Watt was able to improve upon the efficiency of the steam engine and make it useful to several
industries.
E. The puddling furnace increased the availability of charcoal to a variety of industries from cotton to iron
production.
F. Steam power increased coal production, which in turn allowed extraordinary growth of the iron industry and
the British economy.
TPO34-3 Protection of Plants by Insects
1.What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about the
ants that are attracted to the extrafloral nectaries?
A.They do not eat the leaves of the plants that
produce extrafloral nectar.
B.They live almost entirely on extrafloral nectar.
C.They spend most of their energy guarding extrafloral
nectaries.
D.They frequently fight among themselves over
extrafloral nectar.
Many plants – one or more species of at least 68
different families – can secrete nectar even when they
have no blossoms, because they bear extrafloral
nectaries (structures that produce nectar) on stems,
leaves, leaf stems, or other structures. These plants
usually occur where ants are abundant, most in the
tropics but some in temperate areas. Among those of
northeastern North America are various plums,
cherries, roses, hawthorns, poplars, and oaks. Like
floral nectar, extrafloral nectar consists mainly of
water with a high content of dissolved sugars and, in
some plants, small amounts of amino acids. The
extrafloral nectaries of some plants are known to
attract ants and other insects, but the evolutionary
history of most plants with these nectaries is unknown.
Nevertheless, most ecologists believe that all
extrafloral nectaries attract insects that will defend
the plant.
Ants are portably the most frequent and certainly themost persistent defenders of plants. Since the highly
active worker ants require a great deal of energy,
plants exploit this need by providing extrafloral nectar
that supplies ants with abundant energy. To return this
favor, ants guard the nectaries, driving away or killing
intruding insects that might compete with ants for
nectar. Many of these intruders are herbivorous and
would eat the leaves of the plants.
2.According to paragraph 3, what was the position of
the opponents of the “protectionist”hypothesis?
A.Extrafloral nectar provides plants with a direct
defense against attack by insects.
B.Ants substantially benefit plants that secrete
extrafloral nectar.
C.The secretion of extrafloral nectar plays a role in the
plant's internal functioning.
D.Ants visit plants that secrete extrafloral nectar as
often as they visit plants that do not.
5.The word “skeptical”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.curious
B.doubtful
C.open-minded
D.practical
3.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.We now have ample proof that ants benefit plants.
B.Barbara Bentley has called for additional proof that
ants benefit plants.
C.In 1977 Barbara Bentley conducted research that
proved that all prior studies were wrong.
D.Proof that ants benefit plants will require many
more observations and experiments.
4.According to paragraph 4, what effect does the
destruction of the corolla have on plants?
A.It leaves the seeds exposed and unprotected.
B.It prevents the stigma from developing.
C.It keeps pollen grains from attaching properly.
D.It prevents the flower from attracting pollinators.
5.The word “devour”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.attack
B.eat
C.damage
D.prefer
Biologists once thought that secretion of extrafloral
nectar has some purely internal physiological function,
and that ants provide no benefit whatsoever to the
plants that secrete it. This view and the opposing
“protectionist ”hypothesis that ants defend plants
had been disputed for over a hundred years when, in1910, a skeptical William Morton Wheeler
commented on the controversy. He called for proof of
the protectionist view: that visitations of the ants
confer protection on the plants and that in the
absence of the insects a much greater number would
perish or fail to produce flowers or seeds than whenthe insects are present. That we now have an
abundance of the proof that was called for was
established when Barbara Bentley reviewed the
relevant evidence in 1977, and since then many more
observations and experiments have provided still
further proof that ants benefit plants.
One example shows how ants attracted to extrafloral
nectaries protect morning glories against attacking
insects. The principal insect enemies of the North
American morning glory feed mainly on its flowers or
fruits rather than its leaves. Grasshoppers feeding on
flowers indirectly block pollination and the production
of seeds by destroying the corolla or the stigma, which
receives the pollen grains and on which the pollen
germinates. Without their colorful corolla, flowers do
not attract pollinators and are not fertilized. An adult
grasshopper can consume a large corolla, about 2.5
inches long, in an hour. Caterpillars and seed beetlesaffect seed production directly. Caterpillars devour the
ovaries, where the seeds are produced, and seed
beetle larvae eat seeds as they burrow in developing
fruits.
6.What role does paragraph 5 play in the passage?
A.It offers various kinds of evidence for the
protectionist view.
B.It presents the study that first proved that ants
benefit plants.
C.It explains how insects find sources of nectar.
D.It presents information that partly contradicts the
protectionist view.
7.The word “vulnerable ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.numerous
B.harmful
C.open to attack
D.difficult to locate
8.According to paragraph 5, ants defend morning glory
plants from seed beetles in each of the following ways
EXCEPT
A.driving adult beetles off the plants by nipping at
their feet
B.catching and eating adult beetles
C.eating beetle eggs they find on developing fruits
D.making it difficult for beetles to lay eggs on
developing fruits
Extrafloral nectaries at the base of each sepal attract
several kinds of insects, but 96 percent of them are
ants, several different species of them. When buds are
still small, less than a quarter of an inch long, the
sepal nectaries are already present and producing
nectar. They continue to do so as the flower develops
and while the fruit matures. Observations leave little
doubt that ants protect morning glory flowers and
fruits from the combined enemy force of grasshoppers,
caterpillars, and seed beetles. Bentley compares the
seed production of six plants that grew where there
were no ants with that of seventeen plants that were
occupied by ants. Unprotected plants bore only 45
seeds per plant, but plants occupied by ants bore 211
seeds per plant. Although ants are not big enough to
kill or seriously injure grasshoppers, they drive them
away by nipping at their feet. Seed beetles are morevulnerable because they are much smaller than
grasshoppers. The ants prey on the adult beetles,
disturb females as they lay their eggs on developing
fruits, and eat many of the eggs they do manage to
lay.
476Ants are portably the most frequent and certainly the most persistent defenders of plants. Since the highly
active worker ants require a great deal of energy, plants exploit this need by providing extrafloral nectar that
supplies ants with abundant energy. To return this favor, ants guard the nectaries, driving away or killing
intruding insects that might compete with ants for nectar. Many of these intruders are herbivorous and would
eat the leaves of the plants. 
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Sometimes they capture the insects to feed their protein-hungry larvae.
10.Prose Summary: Many plants have extrafloral nectaries that produce nectar even during periods in which the
plant is not flowering.
Answer Choices
A. Evolutionary history shows that plants that produce extrafloral nectar originated in the tropics.
B. Extrafloral nectar has a higher concentration of sugar than floral nectar and is more attractive to ants and other
insects.
C. The protectionist hypothesis is that extrafloral nextar attracts ants, and that the ants, in order to preserve this
energy-rich food source, attack insects that might harm the plant.
D. Evidence accumulated during the twentieth century proved that ants provide significant benefits for plants with
extrafloral nectaries.
E. Research has shown that American morning glory plants that are protected by ants produce significantly more
seeds than morning glory plants that are not protected by ants.
F. Ants generally ignore small insects, but they will eat the adults of large insect species as well as their eggs and
larvae.
TPO35
TPO35-1 Earth's Age
1. The word “trivial”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.similar
B.inaccurate
C.small
D.significant2. The word “episodes ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.occurrence
B.locations
C.effects
D.combinations
One of the first recorded observers to surmise a
long age for Earth was the Greek historian Herodotus,
who lived from approximately 480 B.C. to 425 B.C. He
observed that the Nile River Delta was in fact a series
of sediment deposits built up in successive floods. By
noting that individual floods deposit only thin layers of
sediment, he was able to conclude that the Nile Delta
had taken many thousands of years to build up. More
important than the amount of time Herodotuscomputed, which turns out to be trivial compared
with the age of Earth, was the notion that one could
estimate ages of geologic features by determining
rates of the processes responsible for such features,
and then assuming the rates to be roughly constant
over time. Similar applications of this concept were to
be used again and again in later centuries to estimate
the ages of rock formations and, in particular, of
layers of sediment that had compacted and cemented
to form sedimentary rocks.
It was not until the seventeenth century that
attempts were made again to understand clues to
Earth's history through the rock record. Nicolaus
Steno (1638-1686) was the first to work out principles
of the progressive depositing of sediment in Tuscany.
However, James Hutton (1726-1797), known as the
founder of modern geology, was the first to have the
important insight that geologic processes are cyclic in
nature. Forces associated with subterranean heat
cause land to be uplifted into plateaus and mountain
ranges. The effects of wind and water then break
down the masses of uplifted rock, producing sediment
that is transported by water downward to ultimately
form layers in lakes, seashores, or even oceans. Over
time, the layers become sedimentary rock. These
478rocks are then uplifted sometime in the future to form
new mountain ranges, which exhibit the sedimentary
3. Which of the sentences below best express the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Hutton realized that if these geologic processes
have always occurred at about the same rate as they
do today, Earth 's history is huge in comparison with
human society.
B.Hutton's examination of sedimentary layers led him
to conclude that throughout Earth 's long history,
geologic processes have been generally the same as
they are today.
C.In spite of Hutton 's contributions to the
understanding of geologic processes, what is known
about Earth 's history is minor compared with what is
known about human history.
D.Hutton 's examination of sedimentary layers was
quite vigorous for his day, and his conclusions about
geologic processes are among the most significant in
human history.
4. According to paragraph 4, what happened when
geologists at the turn of the twentieth century tried to
estimate Earth 's age?
A.They ignored Hutton 's findings about rates of
sedimentation and thus tended to underestimate the
age by a factor of 10 to 50.
B.Using the sedimentary record, they were able to
guess the correct age within 100 million to 400 million
years.
C.They did not realize that much of the sedimentary
record is missing and thus assumed that Earth is much
younger than it actually is.
D.They did not correctly calculate the rates ofsedimentation and thus concluded that Earth is much
older than it actually is.
layers (and the remains of life within those layers) of
the earlier episodes of erosion and deposition.
Hutton's concept represented a remarkable
insight it unified many individual phenomena and o
bservations into a conceptual picture of Earth 's
history. With the further assumption that these
geologic processes were generally no more or less
vigorous than they are today, Hutton's examination of
sedimentary layers led him to realize that Earth's
history must be enormous, that geologic time is an
abyss and human history a speck by comparison.
After Hutton, geologists tried to determine rates
of sedimentation so as to estimate the age of Earth
from the total length of the sedimentary, or
stratigraphic record. Typical numbers produced at the
turn of the twentieth century were 100 million to 400
million years. These underestimated the actual age by
factors of 10 to 50 because much of the sedimentary
record is missing in various locations and because
there is a long rock sequence that is older than half a
billion years that is far less well defined in terms of
fossils and less well preserved.
5. According to paragraph 5, Immanuel Kant
recognized that the Sun 's energy
A.could not be sustained through chemical reactions
over the long term.
B.came from compression resulting from the force of
gravity.
C.was largely the result of chemical reactions that
took place over a period of more than a millennium.
D.was necessary to fuel most of the chemical
reactions on Earth.
6.According to paragraph 5, Immanuel Kant
recognized that the Sun's energy
A.could not be sustained through chemical
reactions over the long term.
B.came from compression resulting from the force
of gravity.
C.was largely the result of chemical reactions that
took place over a period of more than a millennium.
D.was necessary to fuel most of the chemical
reactions on Earth.
Various other techniques to estimate Earth's age
fell short, and particularly noteworthy in this regard
were flawed determinations of the Sun's age. It had
been recognized by the German philosopher
Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) that chemical reactions
could not supply the tremendous amount of energy
flowing from the Sun for more than about a
millennium. Two physicists during the nineteenth
century both came up with ages for the Sun based onthe Sun's energy coming from gravitational
contraction . Under the force of gravity, the
compression resulting from a collapse of the object
must release energy. Ages for Earth were derived that
were in the tens of millions of years, much less than
the geologic estimates of the time.
7. According to paragraph 6, which of the following is
NOT true about scientists most recent estimate of
Earth's age?
A.It is based on information taken from the
examination of meteorites.
B.It is surprisingly consistent with estimates from the
nineteenth century.
C.It is confirmed by solar evolution models.
D.It puts the age of Earth at about 4.5 billion years.
8. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 6 about the formation of the solar system?
converged on an age for the solar system, and hence
for Earth, of 4.5 billion years.
A.The Sun was already billions of years old when the
planets were formed.
B.The planets closest to the Sun formed first.
C.Meteorites entered the solar system sometime after
the planets were formed.
D.All parts of the solar system formed at
approximately the same time.
It was the discovery of radioactivity at the end of
the nineteenth century that opened the door to
determining both the Sun 's energy source and the age
of Earth. From the initial work came a suite of
discoveries leading to radio isotopic dating, which
quickly led to the realization that Earth must be
billions of years old, and to the discovery of nuclear
fusion as an energy source capable of sustaining the
Sun's luminosity for that amount of time. By the 1960s,
both analysis of meteorites and refinements of solar
evolution models
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
This idea came to be known as the principle of uniformitarianism, and Herodotus was only the first to
apply it.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not present in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Determining the age of Earth has been a difficult problem in the history of science.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Herodotus attempted to calculate Earth 's age by observing sediment deposits, but modern principles for
estimating Earth 's age from geologic processes arose from the work of Steno and Hutton.
B.Gaps in the sedimentary record began to be recognized by Kant and were later made clear by physicists
studying the Sun 's sources of energy.
C.Radio isotopic dating, made possible by the discovery of radioactivity, and the discovery of nuclear fusion
cleared up questions about both Earth 's age and the Sun 's energy source.
D.Hutton described the effects of wind and water on masses of uplifted rock and was the first to suggest that
much of the sedimentary record was missing due to erosion.
E.Early estimates of Earth 's age based on the rates of geologic processes were inaccurate, and calculations
based on estimates of the Sun 's age and energy source were also extremely low.
F.In the 1960s scientists moved from analysis of meteorites to refinements of solar evolution models and
determined the age of solar system to be at least a billion years.
TPO35-2 The Development of Social Complexity
1. Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 1 as a characteristic of early nomadic
foraging societies?
A.Organization by age or gender
B.Collection of surplus food
C.Equal access to resources
D.Lack of status divisions2. The word “virtually”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.probably
B.nearly
C.gradually
D.fundamentally3. Why does the author mention “modern simple
foragers”?
A.To contrast the diets of modern simple foragers
with those of ancient simple foragers
B.To illustrate the effects of low levels of female
fertility on foraging populations
C.To help support the claim that ancient foragers may
have had low levels of fertility
○To argue for a link between nursing practices and
fertility levels
For most of human history, we have foraged
(hunted, fished, and collected wild plants) for food.
Small nomadic groups could easily supply the
necessities for their families. No one needed more,
and providing for more than one 's needs made little
sense. The organization of such societies could be
rather simple, revolving around age and gender
categories. Such societies likely were largely
egalitarian, beyond distinctions based on age andgender, virtually all people had equivalent rights,
status, and access to resources.
Archaeologist Donald Henry suggests that the
combination of a rich habitat and sedentism
(permanent, year-round settlement) led to a dramatic
increase in human population. In his view, nomadic,
simple foragers have relatively low levels of fertility.
Their high-protein, low-carbohydrate diets result in
low body-fat levels, which are commonly associated
with low fertility in women. High levels of physical
activity and long periods of nursing, which are
common among modern simple foragers , probably
also contributed to low levels of female fertility if they
were likewise common among ancient foragers.
4. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraphs 2 and 3 about sedentary foragers?
A.Their diet did not include as much wild cereal as
that of nomadic foragers
B.Their diet relied less on protein than did the diet of
nomadic foragers
C.They were more physically active than nomadic
foragers
D.They were more likely to breast feed their infants
than nomadic foragers were
5.Select the TWO answer choices that according the
paragraph 3, were probable effects of a more
sedentary existence among foragers. To receive credit
you must select TWO answer choices.
A.More people were available to care for infants and
the aged.
B.The frequency of infant mortality decreased.
C.Women no longer participated regularly in foraging
activities.
D.The life span of older people lengthened.
6. It can be inferred from paragraph 3 that, compared
with simple foragers, sedentary foragers
A.stopped breast-feeding earlier.
B.had lower levels of body fat.
C.ate a limited variety of wild cereals.
D.had less access to easily digested foods.
In Henry's view, the adoption of a more settled
existence in areas with abundant food resources
would have contributed to higher fertility levels
among the sedentary foragers. A diet higher in wild
cereals produces proportionally more body fat,
leading to higher fertility among women. Cereals,
which are easy to digest, would have supplemented
and then replaced mother's milk as the primary food
for older infants. Since women are less fertile when
they are breast-feeding, substituting cereals for
mother's milk would have resulted in closer spacing of
births and the potential for a greater number of live
births for each woman. A more sedentary existence
may also have lowered infant mortality and perhaps
increased longevity among the aged. These more
vulnerable members of society could safely stay in a
fixed village rather than be forced regularly to move
great distances as part of a nomadic existence, with its
greater risk of accidents and trauma.
4.
7. According to paragraph 5, what is one possible
response fro a society that has surpassed the carrying
capacity of its land
A.Sharing resources with neighbors.
B.Making use of additional lands nearby.
C.Moving to better land in areas such as river valleys.
D.Exploiting less desirable resources in their home
territory.
All of these factors may have resulted in a trend of
increasing size among some local human populations
in the Holocene (since 9600 B C E ). Given
sufficient time, even in very rich habitats, human
population size can reach carrying capacity, the
maximum population an area can sustain within the
context of a given subsistence system. And human
population growth is like a runaway train once it picks
up speed, it is difficult to control. So even after
reaching an area's carrying capacity, Holocene human
populations probably continued to grow in food-rich
regions, overshooting the ability of the territory to
feed the population, again within the context of the
same subsistence strategy. In some areas, small
changes in climate or minor changes in plant
characteristics may have further destabilized local
economies.
One possible response to surpassing the carrying
capacity of a region is for a group to exploit adjoining
land. However, good land may itself be limited —for
example, to within the confines of a river valley.
Where neighbors are in the same position, having
filled up the whole of the desirable habitat available in
their home territories, expansion is also problematic.
Impinging on the neighbors' territory can lead to
conflict, especially when they too are up against the
capacity of the land to provide enough food.
Another option is to stay in the same area but to shift
and intensify the food quest there. The impulse to
produce more food to feed a growing population was
satisfied in some areas by the development of
more-complex subsistence strategies involving
intensive labor and requiring more cooperation and
greater coordination among the increasing numbers
of people. This development resulted in a change in
the social and economic equations that defined thosesocieties. Hierarchies that did not exist in earlier
485foraging groups but that were helpful in structuring
cooperative labor and in organizing more-complex
technologies probably became established, even
before domestication and agriculture, as pre-Neolithic
societies (before the tenth millennium B C E) reacted
8. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The appearance of domestication and agriculture
brought about the need for more hierarchically
organized systems of labor and technologies among
pre-Neolithic foraging societies.
B.The formation of social hierarchies meant that
domestication and agriculture became less important
than labor and technical development to the growth
of pre-Neolithic societies.
C.Population increases among pre-Neolithic societies,
even before domestication and agriculture, probably
resulted in social hierarchies that helped organize
labor and technologies.
D.Hierarchies that developed among foraging group as
pre-Neolithic societies responded to later population
increases caused domestication and agriculture.to the population increase.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
Population growth eventually leads to potential problems, however.
Where would the sentence best fit?Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
As human societies in the pre-Neolithic period shifted from nomadic to sedentary lifestyles, their
organization became more complex and hierarchical.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.The shift to sedentism did not occur in rich habitats, where groups were able to maintain nomadic,
foraging lifestyles because of easy access to food sources.
B.In general, the higher the proportion of protein to carbohydrate in a female individual 's diet, the higher the
level of that individual 's fertility.
C.The carrying capacities of certain types of regions such as river valleys were limited by the presence of
neighbors competing for the same resources.
D.Changes in diet and activity associated with a sedentary life may have resulted in higher fertility levels and
better chances of survival.
E.As human populations increased during the Holocene period, they began to exceed the number of people
that could be sustained by the local environment.
F.Societies responded to the limitations of their environment by developing more complex social and
technological strategies that enabled them to produce more food within the same area.
TPO35-3 Seasonal Succession in Phytoplankon
1, The word “minute”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.light
B.common
C.tiny
D.simple
2. According to paragraph 2, one reason temperature
is not likely to be the sole cause of seasonal
succession in phytoplankton is
A.the temperature of seawater changes too often.
B.seasonal succession usually occurs only in
temperate seas.
C.the rate of replacement of dominant species is
slower than that of temperature change.
D.certain dominant species have been observed at
different temperatures.
Phytoplankton are minute, free-floating aquatic
plants. In addition to the marked changes in
abundance observed in phytoplankton over the
course of a year, there is also a marked change in
species composition. This change in the dominant
species from season to season is called seasonal
succession, and it occurs in a wide variety of locations.
Under seasonal succession, one or more species
dominate the phytoplankton for a shorter or longer
period of time and then are replaced by another set of
species. This pattern is repeated yearly. This
succession is different from typical terrestrial
ecological succession in which various plants replace
one another until finally a so-called climax community
develops, which persists for many years.
What are the factors causing this phenomenon?
Considering that seasonal succession is most often
and clearly seen in temperate seas, which have a
marked change in temperature during a year,
temperature has been suggested as a cause. This may
be one of the factors, but it is unlikely to be the sole
cause because there are species that become
dominant species at various temperatures.
Furthermore, temperature changes rather slowly in
seawater, and the replacement of dominant species
often is much more rapid.
Another suggested reason is the change innutrient level over the year, with differing
concentrations favoring different phytoplanklon
species. While this factor may also contribute,observations suggest that phytoplankton populations
rise and fall much more quickly than nutrient
concentrations change .
488
3. Why does the author provide the information that
“phytoplankton populations rise and fall much more
quickly than nutrient concentrations change ”?
A.To argue that the nutrient level not determine
phytoplankton succession.
B.To argue that the succession of phytoplankton is
actually the cause of changes in the nutrient level.
C.To indicate that phytoplankton populations are very
sensitive to changes in the nutrient level.
D.To imply that changes in the nutrient level explain
the succession of phytoplankton.
Yet another explanation is that species
succession is a consequence of changes in seawater
brought about by the phytoplankton living in it. Each
species of phytoplankton secretes or excretes organic
molecules into the seawater. These metabolites can
have an effect on the organisms living in the seawater,
either inhibiting or promoting their growth. For any
individual organism, the amount of metabolite
secreted is small. But the effect of secretions by all the
individuals of the dominant species can be significant
both for themselves and for other species.
These organic metabolites could, and probably
do, include a number of different classes of organic
compounds. Some are likely toxins, such as those
released by the dinoflagellates (a species of plankton)
during red tides, which inhibit growth of other
photosynthetic organisms. In such cases, the
population explosion of dinoflagellates is so great that
the water becomes brownish red in color from the
billions of dinoflagellate cells. Although each cellsecretes a minute amount of toxin, the massive
dinoflagellate numbers cause the toxin to reach
concentrations that kill many creatures. This toxin can
be concentrated in such filter-feeding organisms as
clams and mussels, rendering them toxic to humans.
4. The word “considerable ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.often
B.a few
C.basic
D.significant
5.Paragraph 6 supports which of the following
statements about a phytoplankton species that
cannot produce thiamine?
A.It can be followed in a seasonal succession only by
another phytoplankton species that cannot produce
thiamine.
B.It can never become the dominant species in a
seasonal succession.
C.It can be preceded in a seasonal succession only by a
phytoplankton species that produces thiamine.
D.It is able to produce B vitamins other than thiamine.
6. The copepods mentioned in paragraph 8 are
A.one type of phytoplankton
B.stationary animals
C.selective grazers
D.invertebrate larva
Another class of metabolite is the vitamins. It is now
known that certain phytoplankton species have
requirements for certain vitamins, and that there areconsiderable differences among species as to
requirements. The B vitamins, especially vitamin B12,
thiamine and biotin, seem to be the most generally
required. Some species may be unable to thrive until a
particular vitamin, or group of vitamins, is present in
the water. These vitamins are produced only by
another species: hence, a succession of species could
occur whereby first the vitamin-producing species is
present and then the vitamin-requiring species
follows.
There is also evidence to suggest that grazers
(animals that feed on plants or stationary animals),
particularly selective grazers, can influence the
phytoplankton species composition. Many copepods
(small, herbivorous crustaceans) and invertebrate
larvae pick out selected phytoplankton species from
mixed groups, changing the species composition.
7. The word “simultaneously ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.without limits
B.at the same time
C.merely
D.spontaneously
A growing body of evidence now suggests that all
of the factors considered here are operating
simultaneously to produce species succession. The
importance of any factor will vary with the particular
phytoplankton species and the environmental
conditions.
8. Which of the following statements best describes
how the passage is organized?
A.A description of a phenomenon is provided, forward
hypotheses as to the phenomenon 's cause.
B.Two phenomena are introduced, and the rest of the
passage provides reasons as to why the first is more
common than the second.
C.A group of species is discussed, and the rest of the
passage explains the environmental factors
threatening it.
D.A phenomenon is described, and the rest of the
passage discusses effects of that phenomenon on the
environment.
9.. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
In fact, seasonal succession has been observed all over the globe, from the Arctic to the Tropics.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Several factors seem to play an important role in the seasonal succession of phytoplankton.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.At any given place and time a particular group of phytoplankton species dominates, but the group that has
dominance changes in a pattern of seasonal succession that is repeated on an annual basis.
B.Organic chemicals released by the dominant phytoplankton species, including toxins and vitamins, may
influence successions by inhibiting or promoting the populations of other phytoplankton species.
C.Certain species of phytoplankton release concentrated toxins than can kill other species of phytoplankton.
D.The seasonal succession among phytoplankton populations are influenced by a number of factors including
water temperature, nutrient levels, and the activities of selective grazers.
E.Seasonal succession, unlike terrestrial ecological succession, results in a climax community, which can last
indefinitely provided the right environmental conditions persist.
F.Laboratory experiments have shown that, in temperate seas, temperature is the primary factor in
phytoplankton species composition.
TPO36
TPO36-1 Soil Formation
1. The word “attributes ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.properties
B.surrounding
C.sources
D.nutrients
2. According to paragraph 1, which of the
following factors is the most important in determining
the characteristics of a mature soil?
A.The kinds of minerals in the parent material
B.The extent of erosion in the surrounding area
CThe amount of air that circulates through the
soil
D.The kind of vegetation associated with the soil
Living organisms play an essential role in soil
formation. The numerous plants and animals living in
the soil release minerals from the parent material
from which soil is formed, supply organic matter, aid
in the translocation (movement) and aeration of the
soil, and help protect the soil from erosion. The types
of organisms growing or living in the soil greatly
influence the soil 's physical and chemical
characteristics. In fact, for mature soils in many parts
of the world, the predominant type of natural
vegetation is considered the most important direct
influence on soil characteristics. For this reason, a soilscientist can tell a great deal about the attributes of
the soil in any given area simply form knowing what
kind of flora the soil supports. Thus prairies and
tundra regions, which have characteristic vegetations,
also have characteristic soils.
The quantity and total weight of soil flora
generally exceed that of soil fauna. By far the most
numerous and smallest of the plants living in soil are
bacteria. Under favorable conditions, a million or
more of these tiny, single-celled plants can inhabit
each cubic centimeter of soil. It is the bacteria, more
than any other organisms, that enable rock or other
parent material to undergo the gradual
transformation to soil. Some bacteria produce organic
acids that directly attack parent material, breaking it
down and releasing plant nutrients. Others
decompose organic litter (debris) to form humus
(nutrient-rich organic matter). A third group of
bacteria inhabits the root systems of plants called
legumes. These include many important agricultural
crops, such as alfalfa, clover, soybeans, peas, andpeanuts. The bacteria that legumes host within their
root nodules (small swellings on the root) change
nitrogen gas from the atmosphere into nitrogen
compounds that plants are able to metabolize, a
process, known as nitrogen fixation, that makes the
soil more fertile. Other microscopic plants also are
3. According to paragraph 2, which of the
following statements about soil creation is true?
A.Soil creation requires that there be more plants
than animals in any given location.
B.Soil is created from the organic debris left over
when bacteria decompose.
C.Soil creation occurs when a cubic centimeter of
existing soil contains abundant organic material.
D.Soil is created as a results of bacteria breaking
down rocks and organic material.
4.The word "bulk " in the passage is closet in
meaning to
A.composition
B. largest part
C. richest part
D.quality
5. According to paragraph 3, how do trees
benefit other plants?
A.Trees make deep-lying nutrients available to
plants whose roots do not extend very far into the
soil.
B.When trees decompose, they release nutrients
minerals deep into the soil.
C.Humus from trees provides nutrients for plants
with roots that extend deep within the soil.
D.When trees die and decompose, they make
available a large space for generations of other plants
to grow.important in soil development. For example, in highly
acidic soils where few bacteria can survive, fungi
frequently become the chief decomposers of organic
matter.
More complex forms of vegetation play several vital
roles with respect to the soil. Tress, grass, and other
large plants supply the bulk of the soil 's humus. The
minerals released as these plants decompose on the
surface constitute an important nutrient source for
succeeding generations of plants as well as for other
soil organisms. In addition, trees can extend their
roots deep within the soil and bring up nutrients from
far below the surface. These nutrients eventually
enrich the surface soil when the tree drops its leaves
or when it dies and decomposes. Finally, trees
perform the vital function of slowing water runoff and
holding the soil in place with their root systems, thus
combating erosion. The increased erosion that often
accompanies agricultural use of sloping land is
principally caused by the removal of its protective
cover of natural vegetation.
4956 Paragraph 3 supports which of the following
inferences about the effect of vegetation on soil?
A.The root systems of most crops are unable to
prevent erosion on sloping ground.
B.Without a cover of vegetation, fast running water is
likely to disappear from the ground surface before it can
erode much of the soil.
C.The roots of trees and other large plants remove
much water from the ground, making the soil dry and likely
to be eroded by the wind.
D.Areas that naturally have little vegetation, such as
deserts, are more easily eroded than is agricultural land
that has been cleared of its natural vegetation.
7. According to paragraph 4, earthworms do all
the following to help soils develop EXCEPT
A.eat waste matter
B.mix the soil in different directions
C.change the chemistry of the soil
D.create a natural fertilizer
Animals also influence soil composition. The faunal
counterparts of bacteria are protozoa. These
single-celled organisms are the most numerous
representatives of the animal kingdom, and, like
bacteria, a million or more can sometimes inhabit
each cubic centimeter of soil. Protozoa feed onorganic matter and hasten its decomposition. Among
other soil-dwelling animals, the earthworm is
probably the most important. Under exceptionally
favorable conditions, up to a million earthworms (with
a total body weight exceeding 450 kilograms) may
inhabit an acre of soil. Earthworms ingest large
quantities of soil, chemically alter it, and excrete it as
organic matter called casts. The casts form a
high-quality natural fertilizer. In addition, earthworms
mix of soil both vertically and horizontally, improving
aeration and drainage.
8. According to paragraph 5, in which of the following
ways do some mammals help soils develop?
A.They prevent insects from feeding on nutrients
that enrich the soil.
B.They break up the soil as they move through it.
C.They remove waste matter that would
otherwise contaminate the soil.
D.They ensure that fertilizer remains in the soil
Insects such as ants and termites also can be
exceedingly numerous under favorable climatic and
soil conditions. In addition, mammals such as moles,
field mice, gophers, and prairie dogs sometimes are
present in sufficient numbers to have significant
impact on the soil. These animals primarily work the
soil mechanically. As a result, the soil is aerated
broken up, fertilized, and brought to the surface,
hastening soil development.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Nutrients obtained by these deep roots nourish the trees and are preserved within them.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Plants and animals play an important role in the development of soils.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Small organisms such as bacteria and fungi create and enrich soils by breaking down rocks and organic
matter.
B.Such agricultural crops as alfalfa, clover, soybeans, peas, and peanuts provide nutrient minerals to the soil
as they die and decompose.
C.Trees and other large plants aid soil development by providing natural fertilizer as they decompose, and by
protecting the soil against erosion.
D.Prairie and tundra soils can be found in areas where conditions are generally not favorable for soil
development.
E.Certain animals block soil development by digging holes in the ground that prevent nutrients from reaching
some areas of the soil.
F.Protozoa, earthworms, and small mammals contribute to soil development by aerating, fertilizing, and
mixing the soil.
TPO36-2 Early Ideas About Deep-sea Biology
1. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways for leave out essential information.
A.The hundreds of different species of animals
Forbes collected fell into eight distinct groups, each
associated with a different depth zone.
B.Forbes realized that depth zones, like elevation
zones, contain hundreds of different species.
C.By collecting hundreds of different animals on
land and sea, Forbes discovered that there were eight
elevation zones and eight depth zones.
D.In addition to collecting different species of
animals in eight ocean zones, Forbes collected
different species of plants in eight mountain zones.
2. Why does the author mention that Forbes“extended a line on his graph of animal number versus
depth”?
A.To indicate how Forbes concluded that some
forms of animal life in the depths of the ocean had
never been seen before
B.To help explain how Forbes arrived at his
theory of the azoic zone
C.To make the point that Forbes was a
well-trained professional
D.To show how naturalists of Forbes 's time
carried out their research
In 1841 Edward Forbes was offered the chance to
serve as naturalist aboard HMS Beacon, an English
Royal Navy ship assigned to survey the Aegean Sea.
For a year and a half the Beacon crisscrossed the
Aegean waters. During that time Forbes was able to
drag this small, triangular dregdge--a tool with a
leather net for capturing creatures along the sea
bottom--at a hundred locations, at depths rangingfrom 6 to 1380 feet. He collected hundreds of
different species of animals, and he saw that they
were distributed in eight different depth zones, each
containing its own distinct assemblage of animal life,
the way zones of elevation on the side of a mountain
are populated by distinct sets of plants.
Forbes also thought he saw, as he later told the
British Association, that “the number of species and
individuals diminishes as we descend, pointing to a
zero in the distribution of animal life as yet unvisited. ”
This zero, Forbes casually speculated--he simply
extended a line on his graph of animal number versus
depth --probably began at a depth of 1,800 feet. Below
that was the final zone in Forbes 's scheme, zone nine,
a zone that covered most of the ocean floor and thus
most of the solid surface of Earth: Forbes called this
the azoic zone, where no animal, to say nothing of
plants, could survive.
3. The word “sensible”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.famous
B.highly trained
C.reasonable
D.experienced4.. The word “exceptionally ”in the passage is closet in
meaning to
A.surprisingly
B.extraordinarily
C.frequently
D.specifically
Forbes' s azoic zone was entirely plausible at the
time, and it was certainly far from the strangest idea
that was then entertained about the deep sea. In the
first decade of the nineteenth century, a French
naturalist named Francois Peron had sailed around
the world measuring the temperature of the ocean.
He found that the deeper the water, the colder it got,
and he concluded that the seafloor was covered with
a thick layer of ice. Peron ignored the fact that
water expands when it freezes and that ice therefore
floats.
A more popular belief at the time was that
water at great depth would be compressed to such a
density that nothing could sink through it. This
ignored the fact that water is all but incompressible. But even the more sensible naturalists of the day
were guilty of a similar misconception. They imagined
the deep sea as being filled with an unmoving and
undisturbable pool of cold, dense water. In reality the
deep is always being refreshed by cold water sinking
from above.
The central implication of all these
misconceptions was that nothing could live in the
abyss (deep), just as Forbes' s observations seemed to
indicate. But Forbes erred in two ways. One was the
particular study site he happened to use as a
springboard for his sweeping postulate of a lifeless
abyss. Although the Aegean had been the birthplace
of marine biology, its depths are now known to beexceptionally lacking in animal diversity. Moreover,
through no fault of his own, Forbes was not
particularly successful at sampling such life as did exist
at the bottom of the Aegean. It was his dredge that
was inadequate. Its opening was so small and theholes in the net so large that the dredge inevitably
missed animals. Many of those it did catch must have
poured out of its open mouth when Forbes reeled it in.
His azoic zone, then, was a plausible but wild
extrapolation from pioneering but feeble data.
5. According to paragraph 4, what did all the ideas
about the deep sea discussed in paragraph 3 have in
common?
A.They were all based on Forbes 's observations.
B.They all challenged Forbes 's theory.
C.They all presented the deep sea as lifeless.
D.They all underestimated the depth of the sea.
6. According to paragraph 4, what was one
mistake that Forbes made?
A.He assumed that Aegean 's depths and other
oceans'depths had comparable animal diversity.
B.He placed too much importance on the fact the
Aegean had been the birthplace of marine biology.
C.He failed to notice that his samples of marine
life mostly came from the sea bottom and were not
typical of life-forms at higher levels.
D.He did not realize that the seafloor in many
parts of Earth is much deeper than it is in Aegean.7 The word “inevitably ”in the passage is closet in
meaning to
A.frequently
B.necessarily
C.unpredictably
D.unfortunately
8. Paragraph 5 strongly suggests which of the
following about Forbes and Ross?
A.Forbes got the idea for his dredge from Ross 's
deep-sea clam.
B.Forbes did not know about the discoveries Ross
had made in Baffin Bay with help of his deep-sea clam.
C.Forbes carried out his investigations in the
Aegean partly to disprove Ross 's theory about the
possibility of life in an abyss.
D.Forbes overestimated the depths of the seas
and oceans he studied while Ross 's calculations were
as accurate as those provided by modern soundings.
As it turned out, the existence of the azoic zone had
been disproved even before Forbes suggested it, and
the theory continued to be contradicted regularly
throughout its long and influential life. Searching for
the Northwest Passage from the Atlantic to the Pacific
in 1818, Sir John Ross had lowered his “deep-sea clam ”
--a sort of bivalved sediment scoop--into the water of
Baffin Bay (an inlet between the Atlantic and Arctic
oceans), which the determined to be more than a
thousand fathoms deep in some places. Modern
soundings indicate he overestimated his depths by
several hundred fathoms, but in any case Ross 's clam
dove several times deeper than Forbes' s dredge. It
brought back mud laced with worms, and starfish that
dad entangled themselves in the line at depths well
below the supposed boundary of the azoic zone.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Thus, many people in the early nineteenth century thought that when a ship sank, it never reached
bottom, but instead floated on this layer of dense water.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, most naturalists mistakenly believed that no life could
survive in the deep sea.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Edward Forbes developed the view, based on research in the Aegean, that both the number and variety of
life-forms decline with ocean depth and disappear entirely below 1,800 feet.
B.Before Forbes conducted his research in the Aegean, most naturalists believed that the deep sea was filled
with a pool of cold, dense water that had gradually sunk to the depths from above.
C.The existence of an azoic zone in the Atlantic Ocean had earlier been established by Sir John Ross, who
used a scoop to sample sediment located thousands of feet deep in Baffin Bay.
D.Forbes carried out his research using a small dredge that invented during the time that he spent working
on the HMS Beacon, conducting a survey of the Aegean for the English Royal Navy.
E.Frobes's data was misleading because it was limited to the Aegean, where animal diversity at depths is
unusually low, and because his collecting tool was unable to capture much animal life that did exist.
FLife-forms collected in Baffin Bay at depths far greater than 1,800 feet provided evidence as early as 1818
that the azoic zone later proposed by Forbes did not exist.
TPO36-3 Industrial Melanism: The Case of the Peppered
Moth
1. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Peppered moth populations gradually
increased in size, with dark-colored moths increasing
their numbers fastest in the industrialized areas of
Germany and England.
B.Over a period of decades, dark-colored
peppered moths came to certain areas of the Ruhr
Valley and the Midlands and became the dominant
forms there.
C.In Germany and England, dark-colored
peppered moths forced most light-colored moths out
of their territories.
D.While they also increased elsewhere,
dark-colored peppered moths gradually became the
dominant form in areas of extreme industrialization.
The idea of natural selection is that organisms in
a species that have characteristics favoring survival
are most likely to survive and produce offspring with
the same characteristics. Because the survival of
organisms with particular characteristics is favored
over the survival of other organisms in the same
species that lack these characteristics, future
generations of the species are likely to include more
organisms with the favorable characteristics.
One of the most thoroughly analyzed examples
of natural selection in operation is the change in color
that has occurred in certain populations of the
peppered moth, Biston betularia, in industrial regions
of Europe during the past 100 years. Originally moths
were uniformly pale gray or whitish in color;
dark-colored (melanic) individuals were rare andmade up less than 2 percent of the population. Over a
period of decades, dark-colored forms became an
increasingly large fraction of some populations and
eventually came to dominate peppered moth
populations in certain areas —especially those of
extreme industrialization such as the Ruhr Valley of
Germany and the Midlands of England. Coal from
industry released large amounts of black soot into the
environment, but the increase of the dark-colored
forms was not due to genetic mutations caused by
industrial pollution . For example, caterpillars that feed
on soot-covered leaves did not give rise to dark-
colored adults Rather, pollution promoted the survival
of dark forms on soot-covered trees. Melanics were
normally quickly eliminated in nonindustrial areas by
adverse selection; birds spotted them easily. This
phenomenon, an increase in the frequency of
dark-colored mutants in polluted areas, is known as
industrial melanism. The North American equivalentof this story is another moth, the swettaria form of
Biston cognataria , first noticed in industrialized areas
2. In the passage, why does the author mention that
“the increase of the dark-colored forms was not due
to genetic mutations caused by industrial pollution ”?
A.To suggest that the rate of genetic change in
peppered moths actually decreased
B.To emphasize that pollution in industrial areas
had no role in the increase of dark peppered moths
C.To introduce the information about the
soot-covered trees that caterpillars fed on as the
correct explanation for the increase in dark peppered
moths
D.To reject a view of the role of pollution in the
increase of dark peppered moths that would not
involve natural selection3. The phrase “give rise to ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.live longer than
B.associate with
C.produce
D.compete with
4. The passage suggests which of the followingabout“the swettaria form of Biston cognataria ”?
A.It was a dark-colored moth form.
B.It is now extinct in industrialized areas.
C.It did not exist before the early 1900s.
D.It came to North America from Europe.
5. Paragraph 3 answers all of the following
questions about Kettlewell 's experiment EXCEPT:
A.How was it determined whether a recaptured
moth was one of those that Kettlewell released?
B.Were equal numbers of dark-and light-colored
moths released?
C.What hypothesis was Kettlewell trying to test
with the experiment?
D.What were the results of the experiment?such as Chicago and New York City in the early 1900s.
By 1961 it constituted over 90 percent of the
population in parts of Michigan.
The idea that natural selection was responsible for the
changing ratio of dark- to light-colored peppered
moths was developed in the 1950s by H. B. D.
Kettlewell of Oxford University. If natural selection
was the explanation, then there should be different
survival rates for dark- and light-colored moths. To
determine whether this was true, Kettlewell released
thousands of light and dark moths (each marked with
a paint spot) into rural and industrialized areas. In
the nonindustrial area of Dorset, he recaptured 14 6
percent of the pale forms but only 4 7 percent of the
dark forms. In the industrial area of Birmingham,
the situation was reversed: 13 percent of pale forms
but 27.5 percent of dark forms were recaptured. 
6. What is the purpose of paragraph 5 in the
passage?
ATo explain why Kettlewell 's view has been
widely misunderstood
B.To present a view that various researchers have
criticized
C.To suggest why new developments seem to
confirm Kettlewell 's view
D.To state one of the proposed alternatives to
Kettlewell 's view
Clearly some environmental factor was
responsible for the greater survival rates of dark
moths. Birds were predators of peppered moths.
Kettlewell hypothesized that the normal pale forms
are difficult to see when resting on lichen-coveredtrees, whereas dark forms are conspicuous . In
industrialized areas, lichens are destroyed by pollution,
tree barks become darker, and dark moths are theones birds have difficulty detecting . As a test.
Kettlewell set up hidden observation positions and
watched birds voraciously eat moths placed on tree
trunks of a contrasting color. The action of natural
selection in producing a small but highly significant
step of evolution was seemingly demonstrated, with
birds as the selecting force.
7. According to paragraph 5, which of the
following is true of melanic forms in Liverpool?
A.Increased sulphur dioxide pollution decreased
their numbers after 1975.
B.Their population slowly increased from 1975 to
9.
CFrom 1950 on, they have seldom been seen in
the Liverpool area.
D.Before 1975 their population was higher than
that of light-colored moths.
8. In paragraph 5 the change in the frequency of
melanic forms is attributed to which of the following?
A.New kinds of pollution in Liverpool
B.The passage of the Clean Air Act in 1965
C.Changes in rates of genetic mutation
D.Changes in populations of moth predators
Not every researcher has been convinced that
natural selection by birds is the only explanation of
the observed frequencies of dark and light peppered
moths. More recent data, however, provide additional
support for Kettleweir 's ideas about natural selection.
The light-colored form of the peppered moth is
making a strong comeback. In Britain, a Clean Air Act
was passed in 1965. Sir Cyril Clarke has been trapping
moths at his home in Liverpool, Merseyside, since
9. Before about 1975, 90 percent of the moths
were dark, but since then there has been a steep
decline in melanic forms, and in 1989 only 29.6
percent of the moths caught were melanic. The mean
concentration of sulphur dioxide pollution fell from
about 300 micrograms per
cubic meter in 1970 to less than 50 micrograms
per cubic meter in 1975 and has remained fairly
constant since then If the spread of the light-colored
form of the moth continues at the same speed as the
melanic form spread in the last century, soon the
melanic form will again be only an occasional resident
of the Liverpool area.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
These contrasting numbers of pale and dark forms recaptured must reflect different survival rates.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
The industrial melanism in peppered moth populations that has occurred over the past 100 years provides
an example of natural selection
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Over time, peppered moth populations in Germany and England migrated from nonindustrialized areas to
those that were industrialized.
B.Kettlewell 's experiments showed that birds were acting as a selecting force by eating light-colored moths
on dark trees in polluted areas.
C.According to Kettlewell 's theory, natural selection produced birds that were better able to detect moths
even when areas were polluted.
D.Originally most peppered moths were pale in color, but especially in areas of extreme industrialization,
dark-colored moths began to dominate.
EThe recent increase of pale forms as pollution decreases supports the importance of natural selection by
birds as a factor affecting peppered moth populations.
F.Recent research indicates that when adult moths fail to choose appropriate backgrounds, they are usually
eaten by birds.
TPO37
TPO37-1 Thales and the Milesians
1. Why does the author discuss the question
“what is the world made of ”posed by Thales?
A.To help explain how Thales differed from
earlier Greek thinkers
B.To trace the origin of the question through
ancient history
C.To emphasize that the answer to the question
proposed by Thales was the first correct solution
D.To suggest why the question remained
unanswered for so long
2. The highlighted word “him”in paragraph 2
refers to
A.Thales
B.Anaximander
C.Anaximenes
D.Plato
While many other observers and thinkers had laid the
groundwork for science, Thales(circa 624 B.C.E-ca 547
B.C.E), the best known of the earliest Greek
philosophers, made the first steps toward a new,
more objective approach to finding out about theworld. He posed a very basic question: ”What is the
world made of ?”Many others had asked the same
question before him, but Thales based his answer
strictly on what he had observed and what he could
reason out —not on imaginative stories about the
gods or the supernatural. He proposed water was the
single substance from which everything in the world
was made and developed a model of the universe
with Earth as a flat disk floating in water.
Like most of the great Greek philosophers, Thales
had an influence on others around him. His two
best-known followers, though there wereundoubtedly others who attained less renown , were
Anaximander and Anaximenes. Both were also from
Miletus(located on the southern coast of present-day
Turkey) and so, like Thales, were members of the
Milesian School. Much more is known about
Anaximander than about Anaximenes, probably
because Anaximander, who was born sometime
around 610 B.C.E, ambitiously attempted to write acomprehensive history of the universe. As would later
happen between another teacher-student pair of
philosophers, Plato and Aristotle, Anaximanderdisagreed with his teacher despite his respect for him .
He doubted that the world and all its contents could
be made of water and proposed instead a formless
and unobservable substance he called “apeiron”that
was the source of all matter.
3. According to paragraph 3, some Greek philosophers
who came after Anaximander did not share his belief
that
A.the world was made of something other than
water
B.all life originated in the sea
C.the sky was a sphere surrounding Earth
D.Earth was cylindrical in shape4. The phrase “elaborated upon ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.proved wrong
B.misunderstood
C.repeated
Dfurther developed5. Why does the author refer to “the Scientific
Revolution in the seventeenth century ”?
A.To identify the time when Anaximander 's
theory was first considered seriously
B.To introduce the evidence that helped to
develop Anaximander 's ideas
C.To indicate how long one of Anaximander 's
ideas remained influential
D.To give an example of the many unsuccessful
attempts to dis credit Anaximander 's ideas
Anaximander 's most important contributions,
though, were in other areas. Although he did not
accept that water was the prime element, he did
believe that all life originated in the sea, and he was
thus one of the first to conceive of his important idea.
Anaximander is credited with drawing up the first
world map of the Greeks and also with recognizing
that Earth 's surface was curved. He believed, though,
that the shape of Earth was that of a cylinder rather
than the sphere that later Greek philosophers would
conjecture. Anaximander, observing the motions of
the heavens around the polestar, was probably the
first of the Greek philosophers to picture the sky as
sphere completely surrounding Earth —an idea that,elaborated upon later, would prevail until the advent
of the Scientific Revolution in the seventeenth
century .
6. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Like Anaximander, Anaximenes disagreed with
his mentor.
B.Traditionally, philosophers born after
Anaximenes tended to disagree with their own
mentors.
C.Historians have been able to determine that
Anaximenes was born in 560 B.C.E and that he
followed in the tradition of Anaximander.
D.Even though Anaximenes was Anaximander 's
follower, he disagreed with his mentor.
7. Paragraph 5 suggests that, in speculating
about the nature of the universes, Milesian thinkers
A.made careful use of reasoning
B.studied the universe scientifically
C.tested their theories critically
D.kept their theories simple8. The word “culminate ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.be included
B.combine
C.reach completion
D.be rejected
Unfortunately, most of Anaximander 's written history
of the universe was lost, and only a few fragments
survive today. Little is known about his other idea.
Unfortunately, too, most of the written work of
Anaximenes, who may have been Anaximander 's pupil,has also been lost. All we can say for certain about
Anaximenes, who was probably born around 560B.C.E,
is that following in the tradition of Anaximander, he
also disagreed with his mentor. The world, according
to Anaximenes, was not composed of either water or
apeiron, but air itself was the fundamental element of
the universe. Compressed, it became water and earth,
and when rarefied or thinned out, it heated up to
become fire. Anaximenes may have also been the first
to study rainbows and speculate upon their natural
rather than supernatural cause.
With the door opened by Thales and the other
early philosophers of Milestus, Greek thinkers began
to speculate about the nature of the universe. This
exciting burst of intellectual activity was for the most
part purely creative. The Greek, from Thales to Plato
and Aristotle, were philosophers and not scientists in
today's sense. It is possible for anyone to create
“idea”about the nature and structure of the universe,
for instance, and many times these ideas can be so
consistent and elaborately structured, or just so
apparently obvious, that they can be persuasive to
many people. A scientific theory about the universe,
however demands much more than the various
observations and analogies that were woven together
to form systems of reasoning, carefully constructed asthey were, that would eventually culminate in
Aristotle's model of the world and the universe. 
Without experimentation and objective, critical
testing of their theories, the best these thinkers could
hope to
511achieve was some internally consistent speculation
that covered all the bases and satisfied the demands
of reason.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
In this respect it more closely resembled the thinking of artists and novelists than the thinking of scientists
constrained by fact.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
The early Greek philosopher Thales and his followers tried to achieve a rational understanding of the
nature of the universe.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
○In the Milesian School established by Thales, teachers taught what they knew to their followers, who were
then strongly encouraged to correct any errors in reasoning.
○Much of the written work of Anaximander and of Anaximenes has been lost, including a major work on the
history of the universe by Anaximenes.
○The idea about astronomy held by members of the Milesian School continued to be widely accepted by
scientists even after the Scientific Revolution in the seventeenth century.
○Among early Greek philosophers, there was sharp disagreement even between teachers and students
about the essential substance from which the world was made.
○Anaximander 's work covered a broad range of issues that influenced later Greek thinkers, including the
origin of life, the history of the universe, and the shape of both Earth and the sky.
○While Greek philosophers 'theories about the world did not rely on appeals to supernatural forces, they
also were not scientific, since they were not tested with experiment.
TPO37-2 Direct Species Translocation
1. Paragraph 2 indicates all of the following about
species translocation EXCEPT:
A.It was used to secure food sources before it
was used for conservation purposes.
B.Its disadvantages have led to a decline in its use
for conservation purposes.
C.It has been used successfully on a wide range
of plants and animals.
D.The way in which it is carried out varies greatly.
2. The word “substantially ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.temporarily
B.considerably
C.naturally
D.suddenly
It is becoming increasingly common for
conservationists to move individual animals or entire
species from one site to another. This may be either
to establish a new population where a population of
conspecifics (animals or plants belonging to the same
species) has become extinct or to add individuals to
an existing population. The former is termed
reintroduction and the latter reinforcement. In both
cases, wild individuals are captured in one location
and translocated directly to another.
Direct translocation has been used in a wide
range of plants and animals and was carried out to
maintain populations as a source of food long before
conservation was a familiar term. The number of
translocations carried out under the banner of
conservation has increased rapidly, and this has led to
criticism of the technique because of the lack ofevaluation of its efficacy and because of its potential
disadvantages. The nature of translocation ranges
from highly organized and researched national or
international programs to ad hoc releases of rescued
animals by well-intentioned animal lovers. In a
fragmented landscape where many populations and
habitats are isolated from others, translocations can
play an effective role in conservation strategies; they
can increase the number of existing populations or
increase the size, genetic diversity, and demographic
balance of a small population, consequently
increasing its chances of survival.
Translocation clearly has a role in the recovery ofspecies that have substantially declined and is the
most likely method by which many sedentary species
can recover all or part of their former range. However,
against this is the potential for reinforcement
translocations to spread disease from one population
to another or to introduce deleterious or maladaptive
3. Paragraph 3 answers all of the following
questions about species translocation EXCEPT:
A.In what type of situation can species
translocation be an effective strategy for species
conservation?
B.What are the potential advantages of species
translocation as conservation strategy?
C.What are the potential problems that species
translocation can cause?
D.How can the negative impact of the
translocation of predators or competitors on other
species be prevented?4. The word “appraisal ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.acceptance
B.improvement
C.evaluation
D.application
5. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 4 about translocation efforts?
A.Scientific approaches to translocation efforts
have increased rapidly.
B.The current records of success and failure of
translocation efforts are not reliable
C.Illegal translocations have sometimes been
more successful than the legal ones.
D.The importance of translocation efforts is
becoming increasingly apparent as more of these
efforts are documented.genes to a population. Additionally, translocation of
predators or competitors may have negative impacts
on other species, resulting in an overall loss of
diversity. Last but not least of these considerations is
the effort and resources required in this type of action,
which need to be justified by evidence of the likely
benefits.
Despite the large number of tranlocations that have
taken place, there is surprisingly little evidence of the
efficacy of such actions. This is partly because many
translocations have not been strictly for conservation;
neither have they been official nor legal, let alone scientific
in their approach. Successful translocations inevitably get
recorded and gain attention, whereas failures may neverbe recorded at all. This makes appraisal of the method
very difficult. One key problem is a definition of success. Is
translocation successful if the individuals survive the first
week or a year, or do they need to reproduce for one or
several generations？Whatever the answer, it is clear that
a general framework is required to ensure that any
translocation is justified, has a realistic chance of success,and will be properly monitored and evaluated for the
benefit of future efforts.
6. According to paragraph 5, why did
conservationists decide to translocate the Seychelles
warbler from Cousin Island to two other islands?
A.They were unsuccessful in increasing the
population of warblers on Cousin Island.
B.They warblers were originally native to all three
islands.
CThey wanted to ensure that warbler species
would survive a disaster on Cousin Island.
D.They expected that human activity on Cousin
Island would threaten the warblers.
7.According to paragraph 5, why were the howler
monkeys in French Guiana translocated?
A.Local hunting had dramatically reduced their
population density.
B.Predators had significantly reduced the number
of individuals.
C.The females of the species had lost their
normal behavioral patterns.
D.Their original site was going to be significantly
modified.
8. In paragraph 6, the author mentions Dodd and
Siegel's review of the translocation of amphibians and
reptiles in order to
A.help explain the strategies researches use to
review translocation efforts.
B.support the claim that the successes of
translocation as a conservation technique have been
matched by its failures.
C.explain why the translocation of reptiles and
amphibians is more difficult than that of other
animals.
D.emphasize that translocation techniques have
been tried in a limited number of situations.
An example of apparent translocation successinvolves the threatened Seychelles warbler. This
species was once confined to Cousin Island, one of the
Seychelles islands, and reduced to 26 individuals.
Careful habitat management increased this number to
over 300 birds, but the single population remained
vulnerable to local catastrophic events. The decision
was taken to translocate individuals to two nearby
islands to reduce this risk. The translocations took
place in 1988 and 1990, and both have resulted in
healthy breeding populations. A successful
translocation exercise also appears to have been
achieved with red howler monkeys in French Guiana.
A.howler population was translocated from a site
due to be flooded for hydroelectric power generation.
The release site was an area where local hunting had
reduced the density of the resident howler population.
Released troops of monkeys were kept under visual
observation and followed by radio tracking of 16
females. Although the troops appeared to undergo
initial problems, causing them to split up, all the
tracked females settled into normal behavioral
patterns.
Unfortunately, the success stories are at least
matched by accounts of failure. Reviewing
translocation of amphibians and reptiles, researchers
C.Kenneth Dodd and Richard A. Siegel concluded that
most projects have not demonstrated success as
conservation techniques and should not be advocated
as though they were acceptable management and
mitigation practices.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
This is not the only example of a large-scale translocation that had positive results.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Translocation is used for the reintroduction or reinforcement of species.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Translocation is used in species conservation, but it can also bring about the spread of disease,
introduction of maladaptive genes, and reduction of species diversity.
B.Until recently, most of the successful translocation efforts were carried out by well-intentioned animal
lovers.
C.Even though there are accounts of successful translocation there have been many that have failed.
D.A fundamental problem in the evaluation of translocation is the lack of a framework that defines success
and determines whether a translocation effort is justified.
E.It is relatively easy to justify translocation efforts involving species that have been seriously affected by
predators or strong competitors, but these efforts are the most difficult to monitor.
F.Examples like the translocation of the Seychelles warble and the red howler monkeys in French Guiana
demonstrate that each species requires specific translocation approaches and techniques.
TPO37-3 Modern Architecture in the United States
1. The word “eliminate ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.get rid of
B.avoid
C.minimize
D.replace
2. Why does the author mention that Le
Corbusier included “photographs of American
factories and grain storage silos, as well as ships,
airplanes, and other industrial objects ”in Toward a
New Architecture?
A.To argue that Le Corbusier should be
considered more of a builder or an engineer than an
architect.
B.To support the claim that modern architects
was influenced by practical structures and the ways
they were built.
C.To provide evidence that modern architects
were more concerned with practically than with
aesthetics.
D.To document how architects moved from
designing only buildings to designing vehicles and
industrial objects.
At the end of the nineteenth century, there were
basically two kinds of buildings in the United States.
On one hand were the buildings produced for the
wealthy or for civic purposes, which tended to echo
the architecture of the past and to use traditional
styles of ornamentation. On the other hand were
purely utilitarian structures, such as factories and
grain elevators, which employed modern materials
such as steel girders and plate glass in an undisguised
and unadorned manner. Such buildings, however,
were viewed in a category separate from “fine”
architecture, and in fact were often designed by
engineers and builders rather than architects. The
development of modern architecture might in large
part be seen as an adaptation of this sort of functionalbuilding and its pervasive application for daily use.
Indeed, in this influential book Toward a New
Architecture, the Swiss architect Le Corbusierillustrated his text with photographs of American
factories and grain storage silos, as well as ships,
airplanes, and other industrial objects . Nonetheless,
modern architects did not simply employ these new
materials in a strictly practical fashion--they
consciously exploited their aesthetic possibilities. For
example, glass could be used to open up walls andeliminate their stone and brick masonry because large
spaces could now be spanned with steel beams.
5183 Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The structural role of steel beams made it
possible to hang stone or brick walls instead of using
them for support as traditional architecture had.
B.Opening up walls and corners was unimportant
in traditional architecture so walls and corners were
solid until steel-beam buildings were designed.
C.In steel-beam buildings, the beams provide the
structural support, so walls and corners can be
opened up in ways not possible in traditional
architecture.
D.In a steel-beam buildings the walls are
essentially hung from the internal skeleton of steel
beams, which means that stone and brick masonry are
not needed.
4. It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that all of
the following features of modern architecture seemed
odd from the standpoint of traditional architecture
EXCEPT
A.the use of glass walls
B.the sense of light and openness
C.the construction of balconies with solid
supports beneath them
Dthe hanging of walls from an internal structure
of steel beams
The fundamental premise of modern architecture
was that the appearance of the building should exhibit
the nature of its materials and forms of physical
support. This often led to effects that looked odd from
a traditional standpoint but that became hallmarks ofmodern architecture for precisely this reason. For
example, in traditional architecture, stone or brick
walls served a structural role, but in a steel-beam
building the walls were essentially hung from the
internal skeleton of steel beams, which meant that
walls and corners no longer needed to be solid but
could be opened up in unexpected ways. At the Fagus
shoe factory in Germany, for example, German
architect Walter Gropius placed glass walls in the
corners, effectively breaking open the box of
traditional architecture and creating a new sense of
light and openness. Similarly, steel beams could be
used to construct balconies that projected out from
the building without any support beneath them.
These dramatic balconies quickly became a signature
of modern architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright.
Wright's most dramatic residence, Fallingwater, has
balconies that thrust far out over a stream in a way
that seems to defy gravity.
5. According to paragraph 3, which of the
following is true of steel-frame buildings?
A.They cannot be more than 50 stories high.
B.They cannot successfully combat wind shear.
C.They have greater lateral strength than
masonry buildings.
D.They are usually skyscrapers.
6. The phrase “impervious to ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.hardened by
B.transformed by
Cmanufactured with
D.unaffected by
7. According to paragraph 4, who benefited from
solving problems associated with skyscraper
construction?
A.The inventor of the elevator, Elisha Graves Otis.
B.Engineers and construction workers.
C.People who used the lower floors of tall
buildings.
D.Real estate developers.
The ways in which new technology transformed
architectural design are dramatically illustrated
through the evolution of the high-rise office building.
After ten or twelve stories, masonry construction
reaches a maximum possible height, since it runs into
difficulties of compression and of inadequate lateral
strength to combat wind shear. Steel construction, on
the other hand, can support a building of 50 or 100
stories without difficulty. Such buildings were so
different from any previous form of architecture that
they quickly acquired a new name--the skyscraper.
From the standpoint of real estate developers,
the purpose of skyscrapers was to increase rental
space in valuable urban locations. But to create usable
high-rise buildings, a number of technical challenges
needed to be solved. One problem was getting people
to the upper floors, since after five or six stories it
becomes exhausting to climb stairs. Updated and
electrified versions of the freight elevator that had
been introduced by Elisha Graves Otis in 1853 (several
decades before skyscraper construction) solved this
problem. Another issue was fire safety. The metal
supporting buildings became soft when exposed to
fire and collapsed relatively quickly. (They could melt
at 2700 Fahrenheit, whereas major fires achieve
temperatures of 3000degrees). However, when the
metal is encased in fire-retardant materials, its
vulnerability to fire is much decreased. In Chicago, a
system was developed for surrounding the metal
components with hollow tiles made from brick-liketerra-cotta. Such tiles are impervious to fire.
The
terra-cotta tiles were used both to encase the
supporting members and as flooring. A structure
built with steel beams protected by terra-cotta tiles
was still three times lighter than a comparably sized
building that used masonry construction, so the
weight of the tiles was not a problem.
8. According to paragraph 4, why were
terra-cotta tiles used in buildings with steel beams?
A.Terra-cotta is lighter than steel.
B.Terra-cotta is a fire –retardant material.
C.Terra-cotta tiles were as cheap as bricks.
D.Terra-cotta tiles could be used for flooring.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
Even the air space within the titles served to insulate the metal from the heat of fire.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Direction 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
In the twentieth century, new materials and construction techniques contributed to a change in architectural
style.
Answer choices
A.At the end of the nineteenth century, the emphasis was on preserving and conserving historic civic
buildings rather than on creating new large structures.
B.Modern architects did not accept the traditional distinction between “fine”architecture and buildings that
used ordinary materials and a utilitarian design.
C.Steel construction opened up the possibility of very tall buildings, but these skyscrapers also required new
technologies such as elevators and fireproofing.
D.In his influential book Toward a New Architecture, Le Corbusier argued that builders and engineers ought
to lead a new revolution in building design.
E.Architects such as Walter Gropius and Frank Lloyd Wright used new materials like plate glass and steel
beams to create buildings that emphasized openness, light, and a feeling of weightlessness.
F.Unprotected metal can withstand much more compression than traditional masonry but must be
reinforced with terra-cotta tile or the like to combat wind shear.
TPO38
TPO38-1 Microscopes
1. Why does the author mention “a telescope ”as
part of the discussion of microscopes?
A.To show how microscopes and telescopes are
different.
B.To emphasize the importance of magnification in
all optical devices.
C.To explain how the development of the
microscope depended on the invention of the
telescope.
DTo illustrate the concept of resolving power.
2. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A.A light microscope has the power to greatly
magnify a bacterium that is smaller than 0.2
micrometers.
B.A light microscope can only resolve objects 0.2
micrometers or larger, so it cannot show the interior
form of a cell.
C.The smallest bacterium has a complex internal
structure that can be seen with a light microscope.
D.The greater the magnifying power of a light
microscope, the greater its ability to resolve the
internal structure of a cell
Before microscopes were first used in the
seventeenth century, no one knew that living
organisms were composed of cells. The first
microscopes were light microscopes, which work by
passing visible light through a specimen. Glass lenses
in the microscope bend the light to magnify the image
of the specimen and project the image into the
viewer's eye or onto photographic film. Light
microscopes can magnify objects up to 1,000 times
without causing blurriness.
Magnification, the increase in the apparent size
of an object, is one important factor in microscopy.
Also important is resolving power, a measure of the
clarity of an image. Resolving power is the ability of an
optical instrument to show two objects as separate.
For example, what looks to the unaided eye like a
single star in the sky may be resolved as two starswith the help of a telescope . Any optical device is
limited by its resolving power. The light microscope
cannot resolve detail finer than 0.2 micrometers,
about the size of the smallest bacterium;
consequently, no matter how many times its image
of such a bacterium is magnified, the light
microscope cannot show the details of the cell 's
internal structure.
.
3. What can be inferred from paragraph 3 about the
scientific contribution of Robert Hooke?
A.His discovery of cells resulted from the
examination of animal tissue rather than plant tissue.
B.He was the first person to develop and explain
cell theory.
C.He discovered cells using a light microscope.
D.The full significance of his work was first
understood in the mid-nineteenth century.
4.According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
true of electron microscopes?
A.They do not use light to magnify and resolve
objects.
B.They can magnify the internal structure of a
single atom.
C.Their earliest versions were not significantly
more powerful than light microscopes.
D.They had to be modified extensively for their
use in biology research.
5. The word “detect”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.change
B.reveal
C.combine
D.enlarge
From the year 1665, when English microscopist
Robert Hooke discovered cells, until the middle of the
twentieth century, biologists had only light
microscopes for viewing cells. But they discovered a
great deal, including the cells composing animal and
plant tissues, microscopic organisms, and some of the
structures within cells. By the mid-1800s, these
discoveries led to the cell theory, which states that all
living things are composed of cells and that all cells
come from other cells.
Our knowledge of cell structure took a giant leap
forward as biologists began using the electron
microscope in the 1950s. Instead of light, the electron
microscope uses a beam of electrons and has a much
higher resolving power than the light microscope. In
fact, the most powerful modern electron microscopes
can distinguish objects as small as 0.2 nanometers, a
thousandfold improvement over the light microscope.
The period at the end of this sentence is about a
million times bigger than an object 0.2 nanometers in
diameter, which is the size of a large atom. Only underspecial conditions can electron microscopes detect
individual atoms. However, cells, cellular organelles,
and even molecules like DNA and protein are much
larger than single atoms.
6. According to paragraph 5, what is the role of
metal in the scanning electron microscope?
AIt magnifies the light that passes through the
cells.
B.It coats the surface of cells with protective
cover.
CIt enables the production of images showing the
surface structure of cells.
D.It reveals details hidden underneath the
surfaces of cells.
7. The word “emits”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.transfers
B.excites
C.sends out
D.speeds out
8. According to paragraphs 5 and 6, the
transmission electron microscope differs from the
scanning electron microscope in all of the following
ways EXCEPT:
A.Specimens viewed by transmission electron
microscopes are divided into cross sections.
B.The transmission electron microscope uses
electromagnets as lenses.
C.The transmission electron microscope passes
an electron beam through a specimen.
D.The transmission electron microscope focuses
on the inner structure of a cell.
Biologists use the scanning electron microscope
to study the detailed architecture of cell surfaces. It
uses an electron beam to scan the surface of a cell or
group of cells that have been coated with metal. The
metal stops the beam from going through the cells.
When the metal is hit by the beam, it emits electrons.
The electrons are focused to form an image of the
outside of the cells. The scanning electron microscope
produces images that look three-dimensional.
The transmission electron microscope, on the
other hands, is used to study the details of internal
cell structure. Specimens are cut into extremely thin
sections, and the transmission electron microscope
aims an electron beam through a section, just as a
light microscope aims a beam of light through a
specimen. However, instead of lenses made of glass,
the transmission electron microscope uses
electromagnets as lenses, as do all electron
microscopes. The electromagnets bend the electron
beam to magnify and focus an image onto a viewing
screen or photographic film.
524Electron microscopes have truly revolutionized the
study of cells and cell organelles. Nonetheless , they
have not replaced the light microscope. One
problem with electron microscopes is that they
cannot be used to study living specimens because the
specimen must be held in a vacuum chamber; that is,
all the air and liquid must be removed. For a
biologist studying a living process, such as the whirling
movement of a bacterium, a light microscope
equipped with a video camera might be better than
either a scanning electron microscope or a
transmission electron microscope. Thus, the light
microscope remains a useful tool, especially for
studying living cells. The size of a cell often
determines the type of microscope a biologist uses to
study it.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Live organisms, therefore, would not survive while being observed with an electron microscope.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10.【Directions 】Select from the seven phrases below the 2 phrases that correctly characterize Electron
Microscopes and the 3 phrases that correctly characterize Light Microscopes. Drag each phrase you select into the
appropriate column of the table. Two of the phrases will NOT be used.
Light Microscopes
•
•
•
Electron Microscopes
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Their lenses are made of glass.
B.They use magnetism to bring images into focus.
C.They were invented in the mid-1800s.
D.They are used to study living specimens.
E.They can produce images that appear three-dimensional.
F.They cannot resolve the internal structure of small cells.
G.They can usually resolve details smaller than the size of an atom.
TPO38-2 The Raccoons' Success
1. Which of the sentences below best express the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Reccoons are growing more numerous even
though they must continue to find new habitats.
B.Raccoons are now undoubtedly present in
areas where they once rare or absent.
C.Raccoons have found parties, deserts, coastal
marshes, and mountains to be excellent habitats to
expand into.
D.The number of raccoons must be even greater
today because raccoons have continued to expand
into new habitats.
Raccoons have a vast transcontinental distribution,
occurring throughout most of North America and
Central America. They are found from southern
Canada all the way to Panama, as well as on islands
near coastal areas. They occur in each of the 49
states of the continental United States. Although
raccoons are native only to the Western Hemisphere,
they have been successfully transplanted to other
parts of the globe. 
Following a decline to a relatively low
population level in the 1930s, raccoons began to
prosper following their 1943 breeding season. A rapid
population surge continued throughout the 1940s,
and high numbers have been sustained ever since. By
the late 1980s, the number of raccoons in North
America was estimated to be at least 15 to 20 timesthe number that existed during the 1930s. By now,
their numbers have undoubtedly grown even more,
as they have continued to expand into new habitats
where they were once either rare or absent, such as
sandy prairies, deserts, coastal marshes, and
mountains. Their spread throughout the Rocky
Mountain West is indicative of the fast pace at which
they can exploit new environments. Despite
significant numbers being harvested and having
suffered occasional declines, typically because ofdisease, the raccoon has consistently maintained high
population levels.
2. The word “consistently ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.typically
B.predictably
C.increasingly
D.reliably
3. According to paragraph 3, which is true about
raccoons in Utah 's Great Salt Lake Valley?
AThey were not easily transplanted there from
Indiana.
B.They were not found there prior to 40 years
ago.
C.They were often restocked because of illegal
hunting.
D.They expanded into that area from nearby
suburban and urban settings.
4. According to paragraph 3, the introduction of
raccoons into Utah 's Great Salt Lake Valley appears to
have been an example of an introduction that was
A.motivated by a desire to have raccoons among
the local wildlife.
B.illegal
C.carried out by hunters who wanted more
raccoons to hunt.
D.unsuccessful
Several factors explain the raccoon's dramatic
increase in abundance and distribution. First, their
success has been partially attributed to the growth of
cities, as they often thrive in suburban and even urban
settings. Furthermore, they have been deliberately
introduced throughout the continent. Within the
United States, they are commonly taken from one
area to another, both legally and illegally, to restock
hunting areas and, presumably, because people
simply want them to be part of their local fauna. Their
appearance and subsequent flourishing in Utah 's
Great Salt Lake valley within the last 40 years appears
to be from such an introduction. As an example of the
ease with which transplanted individuals can succeed,
raccoons from Indiana (midwestern United States)
have reportedly been able to flourish on islands off
the coast of Alaska.
5. According to paragraph 4, how has the spread
of agriculture affected raccoon populations?
A.The spread of agriculture destroyed some of
the raccoon 's natural haitats and reduced their
populations in Kansas and eastern Colorado.
B.Because of the availability of corn and other
cereal grains as a result of the spread of agriculture.
C.The spread of agriculture may have contributed
to some raccoon expansion but has not always caused
raccoon populations to expand.
D.The spread of agriculture to Kansas and
eastern Colorado brought increased raccoon
populations in the 1870s and 1880s.
6. According to paragraph 5,what was true about
raccoons before the arrival of European settlers?
A.They were widely distributed through out the
region.
B.They were found mostly in areas of open
prairie.
C.They were not found in most of Canada.
D.They had not yet reached the wooded areas of
the southeastern portion of the region.
7. What can be concluded from the discussion in
paragraph 5 about coyotes and raccoons in Manitoba?
A.In the 1950s both coyotes and raccoons
increased their populations.
B.Coyotes are more difficult to control than
raccoons are.
C.Coyotes and raccoons both tend to prefer
regions that have rivers, streams, and wooded areas.
D.More evidence is needed to determine if
controlling coyotes contributed to raccoon expansion
in the 1950s.
The raccoon 's expansion in various areas may
also be due to the spread of agriculture. Raccoons
have been able to exploit crops, especially corn but
also cereal grains, which have become dependable
food sources for them. The expansion of agriculture,
however, does not necessarily lead to rapid increases
in their abundance. Farming in Kansas and eastern
Colorado (central and western United States)
proceeded rapidly in the 1870s and 1880s, but this
was about 50 years before raccoons started to spread
out from their major habitat, the wooded river
bottomlands. They have also expanded into many
areas lacking any agriculture other than grazing and
into places without forests or permanent streams.
Prior to Europeans settling and farming the Great
Plains Region, raccoons probably were just found
along its rivers and streams and in the wooded areas
of its southeastern section. With the possible
exception of the southern part of the province of
Manitoba, their absence was notable throughout
Canada. They first became more widely distributed in
the southern part of Manitoba, and by the 1940s were
abundant throughout its southeastern portion. In the
1950s their population swelled in Canada. The control
of coyotes in the prairie region in the 1950s may have
been a factor in raccoon expansion. If their numbers
are sufficient, coyotes might be able to suppress
raccoon populations (though little direct evidence
supports this notion). By the 1960s the raccoon had
become a major predator of the canvasback ducks
nesting in southwestern Manitoba.
8. The word “critical”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.predictable
B.crucial
C.negative
D.contributing
The extermination of the wolf from most of the
contiguous United States may have been a critical
factor in the raccoon's expansion and numerical
increase. In the eighteenth century, when the wolfs
range included almost all of North America, raccoons
apparently were abundant only in the deciduous
forests of the East, Gulf Coast, and Great Lakes
regions, though they also extended into the wooded
bottomlands of the Midwest 's major rivers. In such
areas, their arboreal habits and the presence of
hollow den trees should have offered some protection
from wolves and other large predators. Even though
raccoons may not have been a significant part of their
diet, wolves surely would have tried to prey on those
exposed in relatively treeless areas.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Indeed, raccoons now occur in many parts of Europe and Asia, far outside their natural range.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points.
In 1943 raccoon populations in North America began to expand rapidly, probably becoming fifteen to
twenty times larger by the late 1980s.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Raccoon populations have grown in part because of expansion into new habitats created by the growth of
urban and especially suburban areas and perhaps by the spread of agriculture in some regions.
B.Raccoons have been deliberately introduced throughout the United Stated and in other parts of the world,
and transplanted individuals are often rapidly able to exploit new environments.
C.It is unlikely that raccoon populations will grow in the future at the rate they have since 1943 because
raccoons have now colonized most of the habitats suitable for them.
D.Raccoons are native species only from southern Cnada through Cnetral America, but in twentieth century
they successfully migrated to most other regions of the Western Hemisphere.
E.Raccoons became established in Canda when coyotes expanded into their habitats in the United States.
F.The elimination of wolves from much of the United States was probably essential to raccoon 's expansion
and numerical increase, and the control of coyotes might also have contributed.
TPO38-3 Transgenic Plants
1. Which of the following can be inferred about
monarch caterpillars from paragraph 3?
A.They often cause damage to corn crops.
B.They are the only species that is immune to Bt
toxin.
C.They are considered beneficial insects.
D.Their reactions to Bt pollen have not yet been
studied.
Genes from virtually any organism, from viruses
to humans, can now be inserted into plants, creating
what are known as transgenic plants. Now used in
agriculture, there are approximately 109 million acres
of transgenic crops grown worldwide, 68 percent of
which are in the United States. The most common
transgenic crops are soybeans, corn, cotton, and
canola. Most often, these plants either contain a gene
making them resistant to the herbicide glyphosate or
they contain an insect-resistant gene that produces a
protein called Bt toxin.
On the positive side, proponents of transgenic
crops argue that these crops are environmentally
friendly because they allow farmers to use fewer and
less noxious chemicals for crop production. For
example, a 21 percent reduction in the use of
insecticide has been reported on Bt cotton (transgenic
cotton that produces Bt toxin). In addition, when
glyphosate is used to control weeds, other, more
persistent herbicides do not need to be applied.
On the negative side, opponents of transgenic
crops suggest that there are many questions that
need to be answered before transgenic crops are
grown on a large scale. One question deals with the
effects that Bt plants have on nontarget organisms
such as beneficial insects, worms, and birds that
consume the genetically engineered crop. For
example, monarch caterpillars feeding on milkweed
plants near Bt cornfields will eat some corn pollen
that has fallen on the milkweed leaves. Laboratory
studies indicate that caterpillars can die from eating
Bt pollen. However, field tests indicate that Bt corn is
not likely to harm monarchs. Furthermore, the
application of pesticides (the alternative to growing Bt
plants) has been demonstrated to cause widespread
harm to nontarget insects.
2. What conclusion does the author make in
paragraph 3 about the effect of Bt plants on nontarget
organisms?
A.Bt toxin do not affect nontarget organisms
because the toxins only harm pests that eat the leaves,
stems or fruit of the plants.
B.Bt plants have been shown in field studies to
cause great harm to nontarget organisms.
C.Bt plants do not cause as much harm to
nontarget species as the use of conventional
pesticides.
D.Even if Bt toxins do not affect the insects that
feed on the plants, they have harmful effects on birds
that eat these insects.
3. The word “perpetuated ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.continued
B.reproduced
C.observed
D.spread4. Why does the author mention “mustard weed
species”in the discussion of plants that hybridize?
A.To give an example of a weed that may become
resistant to glyphosate due to hybridizing with a
transgenic plant.
B.To argue that creating transgenic plants in the
laboratory is not always necessary, as some can be
created through hybridizing in the fields.
C.To provide evidence that competition from
related species of plants can be a serious problem for
transgenic plants.
D.To support the claim that it is difficult to
determine whether or not a crop plant has been
planted a safe distance from weedy relatives.
Another unanswered question is whether
herbicide-resistant genes will move into the
populations of weeds. Crop plants are sometimes
grown in areas where weedy relatives also live. If the
crop plants hybridize and reproduce with weedy
relatives, then this herbicide-resistant gene will be
perpetuated in the offspring. In this way, the
resistant gene can make its way into the weed
population. If this happens, a farmer can no longer
use glyphosate, for example, to kill those weeds. 
This scenario is not likely to occur in many instances
because there are no weedy relatives growing near
the crop plant. However, in some cases, it may
become a serious problem. For example, canola
readily hybridizes with mustard weed species and
could transfer its herbicide-resistant genes to those
weeds.
5. Paragraph 5 makes all of the following claims
about Bt resistance in insect populations EXCEPT:
A.Regular use of Bt pesticides has not created
resistant insect populations, so the use of Bt plants is
probably safe as well.
B.The evolution of Bt-resistant insect populations
will happen eventually if use of transgenic plants
becomes widespread.
C.Because Bt plants are toxic at all times and in all
tissues, they allow only Bt-resistant insects to survive
and reproduce.
D.Planting nontransgenic plants alongside Bt
plants may help Bt-susceptible insects to remain part
of the population.
6. Which of the sentences below best expressesthe essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The transgenic crop plants currently in use are
probably far behind the transgenic plants of the future
in terms of their sustainability.
B.Farmers who use transgenic crop plants are
heading toward practices that allow natural resources
to continually regenerate over the long run.
C.Transgenic crop plants may be used in place of
other, more sustainable agricultural practices, and this
is perhaps their biggest disadvantage.
D.Perhaps the most serious concern about the
transgenic crop plants currently in use is the
possibility that they may not be sustainable over the
long run.
We know that evolution will occur when
transgenic plants grown on a large scale over a period
of time. Of special concern is the development of
insect populations resistant to the Bt toxin. This
pesticide has been applied to plants for decades
without the development of insect-resistant
populations. However, transgenic Bt plants express
the toxin in all tissues throughout growing season.
Therefore, all insects carrying genes that make them
susceptible to the toxin will die. That leaves only the
genetically resistant insects alive to perpetuate the
population. When these resistant insects mate, they
will produce a high proportion of offspring capable of
surviving in the presence of the Bt toxin. Farmers are
attempting to slow the development of insect
resistance in Bt crops by, for example, planting
nontransgenic border rows to provide a refuge for
susceptible insects. These insects may allow Bt
susceptibility to remain in the population.
Perhaps the most serious concern about the
transgenic crop plants currently in use is that they
encourage farmers to move farther away from
sustainable agricultural farming practices, meaning
ones that allow natural resources to continually
regenerate over the long run. Transgenics, at least
superficially , simplify farming by reducing the choices
made by the manager. Planting a glyphosate-resistant
crop commits a farmer to using that herbicide for the
reason, probably to the exclusion of all other
herbicides and other weed-control practices. Farmers
who use Bt transgenics may not feel that they need to
follow through with integrated pest-management
practices that use beneficial insects and timely
applications of pesticides to control insect pests. A
more sustainable approach would be to plant
nontransgenic corn, monitor the fields throughout the
growing season, and then apply a pesticide only if and
when needed.
7. According to paragraph 6, a sustainable
approach to weed and pest control includes all of the
following EXCEPT
A.watching the fields closely to determine when
weeds or pests are actually a problem
B.to applying pesticides unless or until pesticides
are needed
C.using only one type of herbicide throughout
the growing season
D.planting nontransgenic crops
8. The word “superficially ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.in the opinion of experts
B.at the present moment
C.when done properly
D.without deeper analysis
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
It is especially rare in the United States, where most transgenic plants are grown, because most of the
crops grown in the United States originated elsewhere.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10..【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points.
Transgenic plants include genes from other organisms that make them resistant to glyphosate or toxic to
insects.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A. Proponents of transgenic plants argue that they reduce the use of harmful pesticides and allow the use of
more environmentally friendly herbicides.
B. Use of transgenic plants may lead farmers to neglect more sustainable agricultural practices, and may also
cause harm to nontarget organisms.
C. Over the long term, transgenic plants are likely to lose their glyphosate resistance through evolution and
hybridization with nonresistant relatives.
D. Opponents of transgenic plants worry that resistance to glyphosate may spread to weeds and that
resistance to Bt toxin may develop among insect pests.
E. One argument against Bt plants is that some of the most harmful pests are not Bt susceptible, making
application of supplementary pesticides necessary.
F. Many of the problems identified with transgenic plants today will likely disappear as scientists design
transgenic plants that are more ecologically friendly.
TPO39
TPO39-1 Early Writing Systems
1. Paragraph 1 supports which of the following
ideas about the method of preserving cuneiform texts
by sun drying them?
A.It was regards as unnecessary for texts that
were actively being used.
B.It was discovered accidentally.
C.It was used for texts intended for libraries but
not for other texts.
D.It did not provide enough protection for texts
to survive into modern times.
2. According to paragraph 1, the name of the
earliest form of writing reflects the fact that this
writing was
A.inscribed on damp materials
B.preserved by accidental firing
C.made with a wedge-shaped stick
D.kept in libraries and word-hoards
Scholars agree that writing originated
somewhere in the Middle East, probably
Mesopotamia, around the fourth millennium B.C.E. It
is from the great libraries and word-hoards of these
ancient lands that the first texts emerged. They were
written on damp clay tablets with a wedged (or
V-shaped) stick; since the Latin word for wedge is
cunea, the texts are called cuneiform. The clay tablets
usually were not fired; sun drying was probably
reckoned enough to preserve the text for as long as it
was being used. Fortunately, however, many tablets
survived because they were accidentally fired when
the buildings they were stored in burned.
Cuneiform writing lasted for some 3,000 years, in
a vast line of succession that ran through Sumer,
Akkad, Assyria, Nineveh, and Babylon, and preserved
for us fifteen languages in an area represented by
modern-day Iraq, Syria, and western Iran. The oldest
cuneiform texts recorded the transactions of tax
collectors and merchants, the receipts and bills of sale
of an urban society. They had to do with things like
grain, goats, and real estate. Later, Babylonian scribes
recorded the laws and kept other kinds of records.
Knowledge conferred power. As a result, the scribes
were assigned their own goddess, Nisaba, later
replaced by the god Nabu of Borsippa, whose symbol
is neither weapon nor dragon but something far more
fearsome, the cuneiform stick.
3. In paragraph 2, why does the author point out
that Babylonian scribes were assigned their own
goddess?
A.To explain why scribes in Babylonia were given
the responsibility of writing laws.
B.To indicate a consequence of the fact that
scribes were powerful in Babylonian society.
C.To explain why over time Babylonian scribes no
longer recorded business transactions.
D.To explain how Babylonian scribes came to be
associated with symbols of warfare.
4. The word “abound”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.are important
B.are available
C.are numerous
D.are revealing5. The word “astoundingly ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.truly
B.incredibly
C.noticeably
D.reasonably6.The word “foremost ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.earliest
B.largest
C.most important
D.best understood
Cuneiform texts on science, astronomy, medicine,
and mathematics abound , some offering astoundingly
precise data. One tablet records the speed of the
Moon over 248 days; another documents an early
sighting of Halley 's Comet, from September 22 to
September 28, 164 B.C.E. More esoteric texts attempt
to explain old Babylonian customs, such as the
procedure for curing someone who is ill, which
included rubbing tar and gypsum on the sick person 's
door and drawing a design at the foot of the person 's
bed. What is clear from the vast body of texts (some
20,000 tablets were found in King Ashurbanipal 's
library at Nineveh) is that scribes took pride in their
writing and knowledge.
The foremost cuneiform text, the Babylonian
Epic of Gilgamesh, deals with humankind 's attempts
to conquer time. In it, Gilgamesh, king and warrior, is
crushed by the death of his best friend and so sets out
on adventures that prefigure mythical heroes of
ancient Greek legends such as Hercules. His goal is not
just to survive his ordeals but to make sense of this
life. Remarkably, versions of Gilgamesh span 1,500
years, between 2100 B.C.E and 600 B.C.E., making the
story the epic of an entire civilization.
7. Paragraph 5 supports all of following
statements about Egyptian hieroglyphics EXCEPT:
A.They were associated with building that had a
religious function.
B.They were used in Egypt for many centuries.
C.They were believed to be a gift to humans from
the gods.
D.They were sometimes written on material
made from plants.
8. The word “detected ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.identified
B.described
C.studied
D.classified
9. Which of the sentences below best expressesthe essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Sometimes the appearance of texts was
improved by giving more beatuiful symbols to
individual words even though the sound and sense of
the changed words remained the same.
B.The symbols for individual words were
sometimes moved around in a text, regardless of
these words 'meaning and sound, to make the text
more beautiful.
C.The glyphs used as symbols for individual
words in texts were sometimes chosen more for their
beauty than for their connection to sound or sense.
D.For various reasons, individuals glyphs were
sometimes shuffled to make a text sound more
pleasing, to make its sense clearer, or to make its
appearance more beautiful.
The ancient Egyptians invented a different way of
writing and a new substance to write on --papyrus, a
precursor of paper, made from a wetland plant. The
Greeks had a special name for this writing: hiero
glyphic, literally “sacred writing. ”This, they thought,
was language fit for the gods, which explains why it
was carved on walls of pyramids and other religious
structures. Perhaps hieroglyphics are Egypt 's great
contribution to the history of writing: hieroglyphic
writing, in use from 3100 B.C.E. until 394 B.C.E.,
resulted in the creation of texts that were fine art as
well as communication. Egypt gave us the tradition of
the scribe not just as educated person but as artist
and calligrapher.
Scholars have detected some 6,000 separate
hieroglyphic characters in use over the history of
Egyptian writing, but it appears that never more than
a thousand were in use during any one period. It still
seems a lot to recall, but what was lost in efficiency
was more than made up for in the beauty and
richness of the texts. Writing was meant to impress
the eye with the vastness of creating itself. Each
symbol or glyph--the flowering reed (pronounced like
“i”), the owl ( “m”), the quail chick ( “w”), etcetera--was
a tiny work of art. Manuscripts were compiled with aneye to the overall design. Egyptologists have noticed
that the glyphs that constitute individual words were
sometimes shuffled to make the text more pleasing
to the eye with little regard for sound or sense.
10.【Directions 】Select from the seven phrases below the 2 phrases that correctly characterize Cuneiform
Writing and the 3 phrases that correctly characterize Hieroglyphic Writing. Drag each phrase you select into the
appropriate column of the table. Two of the phrases will NOT be used.
Cuneiform Writing
•
•
Hieroglyphic Writing
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Limited to financial and business uses.
B.Emphasis on the beauty and overall design of the text.
C.Written on clay tablets with a stick.
D.Most characters redesigned 1,500 years after they were created.
E.Up to a thousand characters used during a given period.
F.Written on papyrus and sometimes carved into stones.
G.Used for fifteen languages over a wide area.
TPO39-2 The Extinction of Moa
1. Paragraph 1 supports which of the following
inferences about mammal evolution?
A.Bats and seals most probably originated in New
Zealand and then migrated to other parts of the
world.
B.Most mammal species were already present in
Gondwanaland before it broke up, between 80 to 85
million years ago.
C.No mammals that evolved after New Zealand
separated from Gondwanaland were able to migrate
to New Zealand.
D.No mammals evolved from the animals that
originally inhabited New Zealand.
2. The word “striking”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.abundant
B.attention getting
C.familiar
Dimportant
Between 80 and 85 million years ago,
Gondwanaland, a giant continent made up of what
today is Africa, Antarctica, Australia, and South
America, broke up, thus causing what is now New
Zealand to become separated from the larger
landmass. After the separation, any creature unable
to cross a considerable distance of ocean could not
migrate to New Zealand. Snakes and most mammals
evolved after the separation. Thus there are no New
Zealand snakes, and bats, which flew there, and seals,
which swam there, were the only mammals on New
Zealand when Polynesian settlers (the Maori) arrived
there about a thousand years ago.
When the Maori arrived in New Zealand, they
encountered birds that had been evolving for 80
million years without the presence of mammalian
predators. The most striking of these animals must
have been moa. Now extinct, moa were gigantic
wingless birds that stood as much as 10 feet (3 meters)
tall and weighed as much as 550 pounds (250
kilograms). They are known from a diverse array of
remains including eggshells, eggs, a few mummified
carcasses, vast numbers of bones, and some older
fossilized bones. The species of moa that are
currently recognized occupied ecological niches
customarily filled elsewhere by large mammalian
browsing herbivores. They may have had relatively
low reproductive rates; apparently, they usually laid
only one egg at a time.
3. Why does the author include the information
“Climatic conditions in New Zealand appear to have
been relatively stable over the period during which
moa became extinct ”?
A.To eliminate what might seem to be a plausible
explanation of the extinction of moa.
B.To explain why some moa species may still
have existed at the time of Captain Cook 's first visit to
New Zealand.
C.To explain why, in the late 1700s, moa most
likely lived in remote areas of New Zealand.
D.To suggest that climate conditions in New
Zealand varied widely when moa were plentiful.
4. According to paragraph 4, why is forest burning
considered only a partial explanation for the
disappearance of moa?
A.Forest burning was far less intense on New
Zealand's South Island, where the majority of moa
habitats were located.
B.Moa populations had already been significantly
reduced before most of the forest burning started.
C.Moa became extinct long after the Maori had
stopped the practice of forest burning.
D.Moa gradually adapted to changes that
resulted from forest burning.
It seems possible that when Captain James Cook
first visited New Zealand in 1769, moa (or at least one
of the moa species) may have still survived in the
remote areas in the western part of New Zealand 's
South Island. If so, these individuals would have been
the last of their kind. Climatic conditions in New
Zealand appear to have been relatively stable over
the period during which moa became extinct .
Different factors could have worked in concert to
account for their abrupt disappearance.
Vegetation was considerably altered by the
Maori occupation of New Zealand, a change not easily
explained by climate variation or other possible
factors. Forest and shrubland burning appears to have
reduced the prime habitat of many moa species.
However, the main forest burning started around 700
years ago, after what current archaeological evidence
indicates was the most intensive stage of moa hunting.
While there appears to have been extensive burning
on the east side of New Zealand 's South Island, large
forest tracts remained in the most southern part of
the island. Because major habitat destruction seems
to have occurred after moa populations already were
depleted, and because some habitat that could have
sheltered moa populations remained, it would seem
that other factors were also at work in the extinction
of these birds.
5. Why does the author say that “At one
excavated Maori site, moa remains filled six railway
car.”?
A.To indicate how large the moa population was
before it was hunted.
B.To indicate that scientists were very interested
in learning details about moa.
C.To illustrate the intensity with which the Maori
hunted moa.
D.To suggest that moa hunting was largely
limited to New Zealand 's South Island.
6. Paragraph 5 presents which of the following as
evidence that hunting was one of the factors
responsible for the decline of moa?
A.The length of the period during which moa
were intensively hunted.
B.The decline in the size of the Maori population
in the period after moa were intensively hunted.
C.The large number of Maori living today in areas
that were moa habitats.
D.The large number of hunting weapons that
archaeologists have excaved.
7. According to paragraph 6, scientists may never
know if diseases contributed to the extinction of moa
because
A.previous research to establish the role of
diseases in the extinction of animals did not yield any
significant findings.
B.scientists have difficulty identifying past
diseases from paleoecological and archaeological
data.
C.Moa's fossilized remains contain no DNA.
D.conducting such research is time-consuming
and expensive.
For South Island, human predation appears to
have been a significant factor in the depletion of the
population of moa. At one excavated Maori site, moa
remains filled six railway cars. The density of Maori
settlements and artifacts increased substantially at
the time of the most intensive moa hunting (900 to
600 years ago). This period was followed by a time of
decline in the Maori population and a societal
transition to smaller, less numerous settlements. The
apparent decline fits the pattern expected as a
consequence of the Maori 's overexploitation of moa.
Finally, the Maori introduced the Polynesian rat
and the dog to New Zealand. The actions of these
potential nest predators could have reduced moa
populations without leaving much direct evidence.
The Maori may have also inadvertently brought pests
and disease organisms in fowls, which could have
crossed over to eradicate moa populations. The
possibility of analyzing ancient DNA to identify past
diseases of extinct animals is being explored. However,
evidence of such diseases is difficult to determine
directly from paleoecological or archaeological
remains. For these reasons, it is hard to determine the
likelihood that introduced disease organisms were acause of the decline of moa, but they are potentially
significant.
8. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The extinction of moa suggests the
vulnerability of species to human-caused changes to
the species 'environment.
B.Some species, such as moa, are vulnerable to
changes in their environment.
C.The environmental changes that moa
experienced included modifications to plant and
animal life and the introduction and elimination of
certain animal species.
D.The story of moa raises issues that are
important for ecologists to consider.
While the last of these possible causes remainsspeculative, definite clues exist for the action of the
first two causes. The story of moa species and their
demise raises ecological issues on the vulnerability of
species to human-caused changes--including altered
vegetative cover of the landscape, change in the
physical environment, and modification of the flora
and fauna of a region by eliminating some species
and introducing others.
9.. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
Investigations of DNA recovered from these sources suggests that there were ten to fifteen moa species.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points.
Moa were large, flightless birds of New Zealand that became extinct several centuries ago.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Because New Zealand had no large mammals, moa had no mammalian predators and occupied the
ecological niches that elsewhere were occupied by large mammalian herbivores.
B.DNA analysis of moa remains revealed that the extinction of moa species occurred less than three
centuries ago.
C.Scientists claim that forest burning is the factor most responsible for the disappearance of moa.
D.Initially, moa had a high reproductive rate, but over time it significantly declined, largely due to changes in
New Zealand 's climate pattern.
E.The extinction of moa was primarily caused by the hunting and deforestation activities of the Maori, who
arrived in New Zealand about on thousand years ago.
F.The Maori introduced dogs, rats, and perhaps disease organisms, which may have contributed to the
extinction of moa, but evidence is not available.
TPO39-3 Forest Fire Suppression
1. The word “approximating ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A.containing
B.surrounding
C.resembling
D.providing
2. All of the following are mentioned in
paragraph 1 as consequences of logging that can
promote forest fires EXCEPT:
A.Fires are accidentally started by loggers.
B.Pieces of flammable wood are left behind in
the forest.
C.There is a dense growth of new plants that act
as fuel for fire.
D.The most fire-resistant trees are removed by
the loggers.
Forest fires have recently increased in intensity
and extent in some forest types throughout the
western United States. This recent increase in fires
has resulted partly from climate change (the recent
trend toward hot, dry summers) and partly from
human activities, for complicated reasons that
foresters came increasingly to understand about 30
years ago but whose relative importance is still
debated. One factor is the direct effect of logging,
which often turns a forest into somethingapproximating a huge pile of kindling (wood for
burning): the ground in a logged forest may remain
covered with branches and treetops, left behind when
the valuable trunks are carted away; a dense growth
of new vegetation springs up, further increasing the
forest's fuel loads; and the trees logged and removed
are of course the biggest and most fire-resistant
individuals, leaving behind smaller and more
flammable trees.
3. What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about
forest-fire suppression before 1900?
A.It was more effective than afterward because
there were fewer fires to suppress in most regions.
B.There was no official program of forest-fire
suppression in the United States.
C.Forest-fire suppression was practiced more for
the purpose of protecting homes than for protecting
forests.
D.The Forest Service had rules to control forest
fires, but the rules were ignored.
4. Why does the author include the quotation
“Put out every forest fire by 10:00 A.M on the morning
after the day when it is first reported ”?
A.To suggest that the Forest Service 's goals were
unrealistic and ultimately unattainable.
B.To demonstrate how seriously the Forest
Service took their responsibility of fire suppression.
C.To support the idea that fire-suppression
techniques are most effective early in the day.
D.To provide an example of the new methods
that resulted in successfully firefighting after 1945.Another factor is that the United States Forest Service
in the first decade of the 1900s adopted the policy of
fire suppression (attempting to put out forest fires)
for the obvious reason that it did not want valuable
timber to go up in smoke, or people 's homes and lives
to be threatened. The Forest Service 's announced goal
became“Put out every forest fire by 10:00 A.M on the
morning after the day when it is first reported. ” 
Firefighters became much more successful at
achieving that goal after 1945, thanks to improved
firefighting technology. For a few decades the
amount of land burnt annually decreased by 80
percent. That happy situation began to change in
the 1980s, due to the increasing frequency of large
forest fires that were essentially impossible to
extinguish unless rain and low winds combined to
help.
People began to realize that the United States
federal government 's fire-suppression policy was
contributing to those big fires and that natural fires
caused by lighting had previously played an important
role in maintaining forest structure.
The natural role of fire varies with altitude, tree
species, and forest type. To make Montana 's
low-altitude ponderosa pine forest as an example,
historical records, plus counts of annual tree rings and
datable fire scars on tree stumps, demonstrated that a
ponderosa pine forest experiences a lightning-lit fire
about once a decade under natural conditions (i.e..,
before fire suppression began around 1910 and
became effective after 1945). The mature ponderosa
trees have bark two inches thick and are relatively
resistant to fire, which instead burns out the
understory —the lower layer —of fire-sensitive
Douglas fir seedlings that have grown up since the
previous fire. But after only a decade 's growth until
the next fire, those young seedling plants are still too
low for fire to spread from them into the crowns of
5. In paragraph 3, what is the author's purpose in
describing the natural cycle of fires in ponderosa pine
forests?
A.To emphasize the importance of replanting seeding
after a forest fire.
B.To argue for increasing the effectiveness of laws to
suppress forest fires.
C.To describe how fire affects a typical ponderosa
pine forest in the absence of human intervention.
D.To explain the long-lasting damage that once
occurred in the ponderosa pine forests of Montana before
fires were controlled.
6. According to paragraph 4, why is the human
preservation of Douglas fir sapling trees a threat to
the ponderosa pine forest?
A.The presence of many sapling trees makes it
more difficult for firefighters to reach the source of a
forest fire.
B.Douglas fir saplings are expensive to maintain,
leaving little government money for forest-fire
suppression.
C.Saplings compete for space with the larger and
more valuable fire-resistant trees.
D.Dense areas of tall sapling trees can spread fire
to the crowns of larger, fire-resistant trees.
7. The word “regrettably ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.unfortunately
B.surprisingly
C.probably
D.extremely
8. What does paragraph 5 describe as a solution
to the fires in Western forests?
A.The careful management of forests to reduce
the buildup of fuel loads.
B.The preservation of a dense understory.
C.The occasional flooding of western forests to
make them as wet as those in the East.
D A return to the effective methods of fire
the ponderosa pine trees. Hence the fire remains
confined to ground and understory. As a result, many
natural ponderosa pine forests have a parklike.
However, loggers concentrated on removing
those big, old, valuable, fire-resistant ponderosa pines,
while fire suppression for decades let the understory
fill up with Douglas fir saplings that would in turn
become valuable when full-grown. Tree densities
increased from 30 to 200 trees per acre, the forest 's
fuel load increased by a factor of 6, and the
government repeatedly failed to appropriate money
to thin out the saplings. When a fire finally does start
in a sapling-choked forest, whether due to lightning orhuman carelessness or (regrettably often) intentional
arson, the dense, tall saplings young trees may
become a ladder that allows the fire to jump into the
crowns of the trees. The outcome is sometimes an
unstoppable inferno.
Foresters now identify the biggest problem in
managing Western forests as what to do with those
increased fuel loads that built up during the previous
half century of effective fire suppression. In the
wetter eastern United States, dead trees rot away
more quickly than in the drier West, where more dead
trees persist like giant matchsticks. In an ideal world,
the Forest Service would manage and restore the
forests, thin them out, and remove the dense
understory by cutting or by controlled small fires. But
no politician or voter wants to spend what it would
cost to do that.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
Such a reduction seemed to demonstrate that the program of fire suppression was having its desired effect.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points.
For several reasons, forest fires have increased in number and intensity in the western United States.
•
•
•
Answer Choices
A.Fire suppression, which was initially thought to be beneficial, and logging are two human activities that
have caused an increase in large forest fires.
B.Because forest fires are dangerous to people 's property and a waste of valuable resources, the Forest
Service currently has a policy to suppress all fires within a day.
C.The Forest Service has not yet discovered exactly why the climate of western United States causes some
types of trees but not others to catch fire.
D.Logging is much less likely than other human activities to have effects that contribute to large forest fires.
E.The biggest problem in Western forest management is the increased amount of fire fuel available in forests
as a result of human activity.
F.The United States government and the public are unwilling to cover the costs required to reduce the
increased fuel loads in Western forests.
TPO40
TPO40-1 Ancient Athens
1. Paragraph 1 supports which of the following
statements about the Greek city- states?
A. Most city-states followed the model provided
by Athens.
B. Most city-states were based on aristocratic
rule.
C. Different types of government and
organization were used by different city- states.
D. By 500 B C. the city-states were no longer
powerful.
2. According to paragraph 2, Athens had all of the
following before becoming a city- state EXCEPT
A. a council made up of aristocrats
B. an assembly made up of men
C. a constitution that was fully democratic
D. officials who were elected yearly
3. According to paragraph 3, an important effect of
making wealth the basis of office holding was to
A. make fewer people qualified to be members of
the assembly
B. make it possible for non-aristocrats to hold
office
C. help the aristocrats maintain power
D. Increase economic opportunities for all
Athenian citizens4. The word “abolishing ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A. limiting
B. eliminating
C. revising
D. Supervising
One of the most important changes in Greece
during the period from 800 B.C. to 500 B.C. was the
rise of the polis, or city-state, and each polis
developed a system of government that was
appropriate to its circumstances. The problems that
were faced and solved in Athens were the sharing of
political power between the established aristocracy
and the emerging other classes, and the adjustment of
aristocratic ways of life to the ways of life of the new
polis. It was the harmonious blending of all of these
elements that was to produce the classical culture of
Athens.
Entering the polis age, Athens had the traditional
institutions of other Greek protodemocratic states: an
assembly of adult males, an aristocratic council, and
annually elected officials. Within this traditional
framework the Athenians, between 600 B.C. and 450 B.
C., evolved what Greeks regarded as a fully fledged
democratic constitution, though the right to vote was
given to fewer groups of people than is seen in
modem times.
The first steps toward change were taken by
Solon in 594 B. C., when he broke the aristocracy's
stranglehold on elected offices by establishing wealth
rather than birth as the basis of office holding,abolishing the economic obligations of ordinary
Athenians to the aristocracy, and allowing the
assembly (of which all citizens were equal members)
to overrule the decisions of local courts in certain
cases. The strength of the Athenian aristocracy was
further weakened during the rest of the century bythe rise of a type of government known as a tyranny ,
which is a form of interim rule by a popular strongman
(not rule by a ruthless dictator as the modern use of
the term suggests to us). The Peisistratids, as the
4. The word “embellishing ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. making more attractive
B. providing support for
C. duplicating
D. controlling
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. Cleisthenes, a reformer who recognized that
aristocratic control had been decreasing since the end
of the previous century, finally drove the tyrants out of
Athens in 508 B. C.
B. The tyrants were driven out, and in 508 B.C.
Cleisthenes put in place the structures that completed
the weakening of the aristocracy.
C. By driving out the tyrants, Cleisthenes enabled
the reforms that had been under way since the end of
the century to reach their final form in 508 B. C.
D. Toward the end of the century, the tyrants
were driven out, and in 508 B. C. Cleisthenes saw that
it was time to change the structures that had reduced
aristocratic controlsuccession of tyrants were called (after the founder of
the dynasty, Peisistratos),
strengthened Athenian central administration at the
expense of the aristocracy by appointing judges
throughout the region, producing Athens' firstnational coinage, and adding and embellishing
festivals that tended to focus attention on Athens
rather than on local villages of the surrounding region.
By the end of the century, the time was ripe for more
change: the tyrants were driven out, and in 508 B C a
new reformer, Cleisthenes, gave final form to the
developments reducing aristocratic control already
under way.
6. According to paragraph 4, one effect of making
the
demes the point of entry for civic life was to
A. ensure that every region had the same number
of commissioners
B. distribute the population more equally
throughout the Athens region
C. limit the number of aristocratic clans
D. reduce the importance of family connections
7. According to paragraph 4, one role of the new
council was to
A. determine what issues came before the
assembly
B. prepare the agenda for the courts
C. carry out the assembly 's policies
D. oversee the distribution of food and water
Cleisthenes' principal contribution to the creation of
democracy at Athens was to complete the long
process of weakening family and clan structures,
especially among the aristocrats, and to set in their
place locality-based corporations called demes, which
became the point of entry for all civic and most
religious life in Athens. Out of the demes were created
10 artificial tribes of roughly equal population. From
the demes, by either election or selection, came 500
members of a new council, 6,000 jurors for the courts,
10 generals, and hundreds of commissioners. The
assembly was sovereign in all matters but in practice
delegated its power to subordinate bodies such as the
council, which prepared the agenda for the meetings
of the assembly, and courts, which took care of most
judicial matters. Various committees acted as an
executive branch, implementing policies of the
assembly and supervising, for instance, the food and
water supplies and public buildings. This wide-scale
participation by the citizenry in the government
distinguished the democratic form of the Athenian
polis from other, less liberal forms.
8. The word “stunning ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. popular
B. universal
C. impressive
D. Continuing
The effect of Cleisthenes 'reforms was to establish the
superiority of the Athenian community as a whole
over local institutions without destroying them.
National politics rather than local or deme politics
became the focal point. At the same time, entry into
national politics began at the deme level and gave
local loyalty a new focus: Athens itself. Over the next
two centuries the implications of Cleisthenes 'reformswere fully exploited .
During the fifth century B. C. the council of 500
was extremely influential in shaping policy. In the
next century, however, it was the mature assembly
that took on decision-making responsibility. By any
measure other than that of the aristocrats, who had
been upstaged by the supposedly inferior "people,"the Athenian democracy was a stunning success.
Never before, or since, have so many people been
involved in the serious business of self-governance.
It was precisely this opportunity to participate in
public life that provided a stimulus for the brilliant
unfolding of classical Greek culture. 
One of the most important changes in Greece
during the period from 800 B.C. to 500 B.C. was the
rise of the polis, or city-state, and each polis
developed a system of government that was
appropriate to its circumstances. The problems that
were faced and solved in Athens were the sharing of
political power between the established aristocracy
and the emerging other classes, and the adjustment of
aristocratic ways of life to the ways of life of the new
polis. It was the harmonious blending of all of these
elements that was to produce the classical culture of
Athens.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Indeed, at the height of Athenian democracy there was no government separate from its citizenry.
Where does the sentence best fit?
10.Directions : An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selected THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Between 600 B.C. and 450 B.C., Athens changed the distribution of political power between the aristocracy
and ordinary citizens.



Answer Choices
A. The rise of the city-state put enormous pressure on the aristocracy to change its traditional way of life to
make it appear more in harmony with the values of classical Athenian culture.
B. The aristocrats staged elaborate festivals that focused attention on Athens instead of the surrounding
villages.
C. Cleisthenes' reforms reduced aristocratic power by reorganizing the citizen body and changing the entry
points to civic life so that political power did not rely on traditional family and clan structures.
D. The aristocracy 's monopoly on political power ended with Solon 's reforms, and its political influence was
further eroded by the centralization of administration under the tyrants.
E. Cleisthenes gave each tribe an equal number of council members, jurors, generals, and commissioners.
F. Over time, as the all-citizen assembly took on more and more of the actual exercise of political power,
ordinary citizens participated in public life more fully than ever before.
TPO40-2 Latitude and Biodiversity
1. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. Some biogeographers believe that the tropics
have larger surface areas than they actually do
because of the distortions produced by projections of
Earth's curved surface
B. High levels of diversity in the tropics are
sometimes attributed to the fact that the tropics have
more surface area of land than the higher latitudes do,
though distortions in commonly used projections may
seem to suggest otherwise.
C. Because biogeographers disagree on whether
or not the tropics are correctly represented in
projections of Earth s surface, it is difficult to
determine the relationship their surface area has to
their diversity
D. Most biogeographers agree that the tropics
contain a larger surface area of land than higher
latitudes do ，but they disagree on whether or not the
tropics' level of diversity is a reflection of that larger
surface area.
When we look at the way in which biodiversity
(biological diversity) is distributed over the land
surface of the planet, we find that it is far from even.
The tropics contain many more species overall than an
equivalent area at the higher latitudes. This seems to
be true for many different groups of animals and
plants.
Why is it that higher latitudes have lower
diversities than the tropics? Perhaps it is simply a
matter of land area. The tropics contain a larger
surface area of land than higher latitudes— a fact that
is not always evident when we examine commonly
used projections of Earth 's curved surface, since this
tends to exaggerate the areas of land in the higher
latitudes— and some biogeographers regard the
differences in diversity as a reflection of this effect.
But an analysis of the data by biologist Klaus Rohde
does not support this explanation. Although area may
contribute to biodiversity, it is certainly not the whole
story; otherwise, large landmasses would always be
richer in species.
2. Why does the author mention “Klaus Rohde ”in the
passage?
A. To support the argument that large
landmasses are usually richer in species than smaller
ones are
B. To introduce the argument that there are other
factors contributing to species diversity besides land
area
C. To cast doubt on whether the tropics actually
contain higher species diversity than land at higher
latitudes does
D. To emphasize that biogeographers and
biologists differ in their approaches to biodiversity
3. Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 3 as a condition that benefits plant growth?
A. High temperatures
B. Steady temperatures
C. High latitude
D. Plentiful water
4. Paragraph 3 mentions which of the following
as creating the structural complexity of a forest?
A. The height of the very tallest trees in the forest
B. The number of layers of canopy
C. The frequency of floods along the plain
D. The age of the root tissues below the ground
Productivity seems to be involved instead,
though perhaps its influence is indirect. Where
conditions are most suitable for plant growth —that is,
where temperatures are relatively high and uniform
and where there is an ample supply of water —one
usually finds large masses of vegetation. This leads to
a complex structure in the layers of plant material. In a
tropical rain forest, for example, a very large quantity
of plant material builds up above the surface of the
ground .
There is also a large mass of material,
developed below ground as root tissues, but this is
less apparent. Careful analysis of the above ground
material reveals that it is arranged in a series of layers,the precise number of layers varying with age and the
nature of the forest. The arrangement of the biological
mass ("biomass") of the vegetation into layered forms
is termed its “structure ”(as opposed to its
“composition, ”which refers to the species of
organisms forming the community). Structure is
essentially the architecture of vegetation, and as in
the case of tropical forests, it can be extremelycomplicated. In a mature floodplain tropical forest in
the Amazon River basin , the canopy (the uppermost
layers of a forest, formed by the crowns of trees) takes
on a stratified structure. There are three clear peaks in
leaf cover at heights of approximately 3, 6, and 30
meters above the ground; and the very highest layer,
at 50 meters, corresponds to the very tall trees that
stand free of the main canopy and form an open layer
of their own. So, such a forest contains essentially four
5. According to paragraph 3, which of the
following statements best describes the difference
between structure and composition?
A.“Structure ”refers to the arrangement of plant
material above the ground surface; “composition ”
refers to the arrangement of root tissues below the
surface of the ground.
B.“Structure ”refers to the age of the forest;
“composition ”refers to the forest's nature.
C.“Structure ”refers to the arrangement of plant
species in an area, “composition ”refers to which plant
species are present in the area.
D.“Structure ”refers to the shape of the forest
canopy;“composition ”refers to the number of crowns
forming the canopy.
6. Why does the author mention “mature
floodplain tropical forest in the Amazon River basin ”in
the passage?
A. To dispute the idea that tropical forests are
arranged in layers
B. To give an example of the complex architecture
vegetation displays in a dense area
C. To suggest that the layers of canopy in some
tropical forests can exceed the usual three or four
D. To emphasize that the layers of canopy in a
tropical forest give evidence of the number of layers of
root tissues below the ground
7.Which of the following is NOT mentioned in
paragraph 4 as an aspect of microclimate?
A. Temperature range
B. Relative humidity
C. Light intensity
D. Seasonal variations
Structure has a strong influence on the animal life
inhabiting a site. It forms the spatial environment
within which an animal feeds, moves around shelters,
lives, and breeds. It even affects the climate on a very
local level (the "microclimate") by influencing light
intensity, humidity, and both the range and extremes
of temperature. An area of grassland vegetation with
very simple structure, for example, has a very different
microclimate at the ground level from that
experienced in the upper canopy. Wind speeds are
lower, temperatures are lower during the day (but
warmer at night), and the relative humidity is much
greater near the ground. The complexity of the
microclimate is closely related to the complexity of
structure in vegetation, and generally speaking, the
more complex the structure of vegetation, the more
8. The word “consequently ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A. usually
B. obviously
C. however
D. thereforelayers of canopy. Forests in temperate lands often
have just two canopy layers, so they have much less
complex architecture.species of animal are able to
make a living there. The high plant biomass of the
tropics leads to a greater spatial complexity in the
environment, and this leads to a higher potential for
diversity in the living things that can occupy a region.
The climates of the higher latitudes are generally less
favorable for the accumulation of large quantities of
biomass; hence, the structure of vegetation is simplerand the animal diversity is consequently
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
One example of such tropical abundance is found in Panama, which has 667 species of breeding birds-three
times the number found in Alaska.
Where does the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selected THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
A.number of factors may help account for the difference in biodiversity between low and high latitudes.



Answer Choices
A. Though land area may be related to a region's biodiversity, it is not a primary determining factor.
B. A structure of varying heights is found in both tropical and temperate forests.
C. The more complex the structure of the vegetation of a region, the more species it is able to support.
D. Regions possessing conditions that are favorable for plant growth tend to have abundant and diverse
vegetation that supports a large number of species.
E. The difference in microclimate between a ground-level canopy and an upper-level canopy is responsible for
the number of species that inhabit each canopy.
F. The temperature range of a region determines the number of animals that feed, move around, shelter
themselves, live, and breed in that region.
TPO40-3 Amphibian Thermoregulation
1. Why does the author mention a “South
American frog ”species in the passage?
A. To make the point that an amphibian 's
temperature tolerance depends on a number of
factors.
B. To indicate how precise the range of body
temperatures is for certain amphibians.
C. To contrast its ability to adapt to that of the
North American newt.
D. To help illustrate the range of environmental
conditions to which amphibians have adapted.
In contrast to mammals and birds, amphibians
are unable to produce thermal energy through their
metabolic activity, which would allow them to regulate
their body temperature independent of the
surrounding or ambient temperature. However, the
idea that amphibians have no control whatsoever over
their body temperature has been proven false because
their body temperature does not always correspond
to the surrounding temperature. While amphibians
are poor thermoregulators, they do exercise control
over their body temperature to a limited degree.
Physiological adaptations can assist amphibians in
colonizing habitats where extreme conditions prevail.
The tolerance range in body temperature represents
the range of temperatures within which a species can
survive. One species of North American newt is still
active when temperatures drop to -2 °C while one
South American frog feels comfortable even when
temperatures rise to 41 °C—the highest body
temperature measured in a free-ranging amphibian.
Recently it has been shown that some North
American frog and toad species can survive up to five
days with a body temperature of -6 °C with
approximately one-third of their body fluids frozen.
The other tissues are protected because they contain
the frost-protective agents glycerin or glucose.
Additionally, in many species the tolerance
boundaries are flexible and can change as a result of
acclimatization (long-term exposure to particular
conditions). 
2.“Phyllomedusa sauvager ”is mentioned as an
example of a frog with an adaptation that
A. protects its glandular system
B. helps reduce its secretions
C. increases the amount of solar radiation that its
skin can reflect
D. modifies its skin structure to protect against
the drying effects of the sun
3. Paragraph 4 mentions each of the following as
an example of behavioral thermoregulation EXCEPT
A. pressing against the ground
B. speeding up of the metabolism
C. reducing activity during the summer
D. adjusting exposure to the sun4. The“Andean toad Bufo spinulosus ”illustrates
which of the following behavioral modifications?
A. Heliothermy and thigmothermy
B. Diurnal avoidance behavior
C. Absorbing heat from the air
D. Moving to shelter during the summer
Frog species that remain exposed to the sun
despite high diurnal (daytime) temperatures exhibit
some fascinating modifications in the skin structure
that function as morphological adaptations. Most
amphibian skin is fully water permeable and is
therefore not a barrier against evaporation or solar
radiation. The African savanna frog Hyperolius
viridiflavus stores guanine crystals in its skin, which
enable it to better reflect solar radiation, thus
providing protection against overheating. The treefrog Phyllomedusa sauvagei responds to evaporative
losses with gland secretions that provide a greasy film
over its entire body that helps prevent desiccation
(dehydration).
However, behavior is by far the most important factor
in thermoregulation. The principal elements in
behavioral thermoregulation are basking
(heliothermy), heat exchange with substrates such as
rock or earth (thigmothermy), and diurnal and annual
avoidance behaviors, which include moving to shelter
during the day for cooling and hibernating or
estivating (reducing activity during cold or hot weather,
respectively). Heliothermy is especially common
among frogs and toads: it allows them to increase
their body temperature by more than 10 °C. The
Andean toad Bufo spinulosus exposes itself
immediately after sunrise on moist ground and attains
its preferred body temperature by this means, long
before either ground or air is correspondingly warmed.
A positive side effect of this approach is that it
accelerates the digestion of the prey consumed
overnight, thus also accelerating growth.
Thigmothermy is a behavior present in most
amphibians, although pressing against the ground
serves a dual purpose: heat absorption by conductivity
and water absorption through the skin. The effect of
thigmothermy is especially evident in the Andean toad
during rainfall: its body temperature corresponds to
emperature of the warm earth and not to the much
cooler air temperature
5. The phrase “this approach ”in the passage
refers to
A. gradually increasing body temperature by 10 °C
B. basking as soon as the sun comes up
C. waiting for the ground and air to warm
the
D. keeping body temperature above the
temperature of the air
6. According to paragraph 5, why is avoidance
behavior important for some amphibians?
A. Amphibians' habitats are areas where
temperatures vary from day to day.
B. Amphibians have less tolerance for high
ambient temperatures than for low ambient
temperatures.
C. Amphibians lack adequate physiological
adaptations for dealing with ambient temperatures.
D. Amphibians cannot protect themselves from
the extreme summer heat by being active only at
night.
7.In paragraph 6, which of the following can be
inferred from the discussion of the natterjack?
A. Amphibians have greater tolerance for heat
than for cold.
B. Desiccation is not a threat to amphibians.
C. Both hibernation and estivation may serve as
avoidance behaviors depending on the climate.
D. Some species of amphibians are active only in
the spring and in the fall.
Avoidance behavior occurs whenever
physiological and morphological adaptations are
insufficient to maintain body temperature within the
vital range. Nocturnal activity in amphibians with low
tolerance for high ambient temperatures is a typical
thermoregulatory behavior of avoidance. Seasonal
avoidance behavior is extremely important in many
amphibians. Species whose habitat lies in the
temperate latitudes are confronted by lethal lowtemperatures in winter, while species dwelling in
semi- and regions are exposed to long dry, hot periods
in summer.
In amphibians hibernation occurs in mud or deep
holes away from frost. North of the Pyrenees
Mountains, the natterjack toad offers a good example
of hibernation, passing the winter dug deep into sandy
ground. Conversely, natterjacks in southern Spain
remain active during the mild winters common to the
region and are instead forced into inactivity during the
dry, hot summer season. Summer estivation also
occurs by burrowing into the ground or hiding in cool,
deep rock crevasses to avoid desiccation and lethalambient temperature. Amphibians are therefore
8. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. Thus, although amphibians use the various
mechanisms described above, they have hardly any
control of their body temperature.
B. Thus, by the mechanisms described above,
amphibians are quite capable of controlling their body
temperature to survive extreme ambient
temperatures.
C. Thus, unless they can use the mechanisms
described above, amphibians are at the mercy of
ambient temperatures.
D. Thus, the mechanisms described above give
amphibians control over much more than just their
body temperature.hardly at mercy of ambient temperature, since by
means of the mechanisms described above they are
more than) exercise some control over their body
temperature.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
On the other hand, amphibians in very hot climates use secretions from the mucus glands to decrease their
temperature through evaporative cooling on the skin.
Where does the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selected THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
A.number of factors may help account for the difference in biodiversity between low and high latitudes.



Answer Choices
A. Frogs, which survive temperature ranges from as low as -2° C to as high as 41 °C, are evidence that
amphibians are independent of ambient temperatures
B. Amphibians can increase their body temperature by exposing themselves to the sun (heliothermy) and by
pressing against the ground (thigmothermy).
C. Avoidance behaviors, such as sheltering from the sun, as well as estivation and hibernation ，help
amphibians control their body temperature.
D. Physical adaptations offer amphibians a number of ways to protect against extreme or dangerous climate
conditions.
E. Sunrise is the time when some amphibian species have the greatest need for thermoregulatory
mechanisms.
F. Hibernation always involves digging deep holes in mud or sand, whereas estivation sometimes involves
nothing more than hiding in deep rock crevasses.
TPO41
TPO41-1 Navajo Art
1. The word “enlist " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. assist
B. require
C. describe
D. Recruit
2. What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about
the Navajo ritual chants?
A. There is a large number of them.
B. Each of them corresponds to a particular sand
painting.
C. They are difficult to remember.
D. They do not take long to perform.
3. According to paragraph 1, all of the following
are true of many important Navajo rituals
EXCEPT:
A. They involve the creation of large, detailed
images.
B. They include performers whose faces are
covered.
C. They take place indoors.
D. They are performed without elaborate
planning.
The Navajo, a Native American people living in
the southwestern United States, live in small scattered
settlements. In many respects, such as education,
occupation, and leisure activities, their life is like that
of other groups that contribute to the diverse social
fabric of North American culture in the twenty-first
century. At the same time, they have retained some
traditional cultural practices that are associated with
particular art forms. For example, the most important
traditional Navajo rituals include the production of
large floor paintings. These are actually made by
pouring thin, finely controlled streams of colored
sands or pulverized vegetable and mineral substances,pollen, and flowers in precise patterns on the ground.
The largest of these paintings may be up to 5.5 meters
in diameter and cover the entire floor of a room.
Working from the inside of the design outward, the
Navajo artist and his assistants will sift the black,
white, bluish-gray, orange, and red materials through
their fingers to create the finely detailed imagery. 
The paintings and chants used in the ceremonies aredirected by well-trained artists and singers who enlist
the aid of spirits who are impersonated by masked
performers. The twenty-four known Navajo chants
can be represented by up to 500 sand paintings.
These complex paintings serve as memory aids to
guide the singers during the performance of the ritual
songs, which can last up to nine days. 
4. The word “faithful”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. modern
B. accurate
C. wonderful
D. Simplified
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. The Navajo used the symbolism and beauty of
their works of art to improve their life in an often
inhospitable environment.
B. The ideas the Navajo hold about symbolism
and beauty were influenced by their inhospitable
climate, neighbors, and rulers.
restoration of harmony through a ceremony can be
part of a curing process.
C. When they first arrived in the Southwest, the
Navajo produced symbolic art forms that promoted
harmony.
D. In their works of art, the Navajo emphasized
beauty and harmony that can be found even under
the most inhospitable circumstances.
The purpose and meaning of the sand paintings can be
explained by examining one of the most basic ideals of
Navajo society, embodied in their word hozho(beauty or
harmony, goodness, and happiness). It coexists with
hochxo ("ugliness," or "evil," and "disorder") in a world
where opposing forces of dynamism and stability create
constant change. When the world, which was created in
beauty, becomes ugly and disorderly, the Navajo gather to
perform rituals with songs and make sand paintings to
restore beauty and harmony to the world. Some illness is
itself regarded as a type of disharmony. Thus, the
restoration of harmony through a ceremony can be part of
a curing process.
Men make sand paintings that are accurate
copies of paintings from the past. The songs sung overthe paintings are also faithful renditions of songs from
the past. By recreating these arts, which reflect the
original beauty of creation, the Navajo bring beauty to
the present world. As relative newcomers to the
Southwest, a place where their climate, neighbors,
and rulers could be equally inhospitable, the Navajo
created these art forms to affect the world around
them, not just through the recounting of the actions
symbolized, but through the beauty and harmony of
the artworks themselves. The paintings generally
illustrate ideas and events from the life of a mythical
hero, who, after being healed by the gods, gave gifts
of songs and paintings. Working from memory, the
artists re-create the traditional form of the image as
accurately as possible.
6. Paragraph 4 supports which of the following
statements about Navajo weavers and weaving?
A. Navajo women oversee all aspects of wool
production and weaving.
B. The wool used for blankets comes from
different sheep than does the wool used for other
purposes.
C. Navajo weavers have used some of the same
designs for hundreds of years.
D. Weaving is done primarily for use in rituals.
7. The word “ancestor”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. relative from an earlier generation
B. person who established a particular tradition
in a society
C. hero from ancient times
D. person who once made important
contributions to a social group or culture
8. Why does the author discuss “a mythic
ancestor”?
A. To show how Navajo ideas of weaving have
changed over time.
B. To explain why the Navajo principle of stability
is more clearly represented in their weavings than in
their
C. To emphasize the role of naturally occurring
weaving materials in the creative weavings of the
Navajo.
D. To help explain the significance of weaving in
Navajo culture.
12. According to paragraph 4, Navajo weavers
imitate
A. traditional weaving patterns
B. patterns used in sand paintings
C. the activities through which the world was
created
D. images from nature sand paintings.
The Navajo are also world-famous for the designs
on their woven blankets. Navajo women own the
family flocks, control the shearing of the sheep, the
carding, the spinning, and dying of the thread, and the
weaving of the fabrics. While the men who make
faithful copies of sand paintings from the past
represent the principle of stability in Navajo thought,
women embody dynamism and create new designs for
every weaving they make. Weaving is a paradigm ofthe creativity of a mythic ancestor named Spider,
woman who wove the universe as a cosmic web that
united earth and sky. It was she who, according to
legend, taught Navajo women how to weave. As they
prepare their materials and weave, Navajo women
imitate the transformations that originally created the
world.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Since this purpose is limited to the context of the ritual, the paintings are destroyed when the ritual is
completed.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selected THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points .
Navajo art is fundamentally connected to aspects of Navajo ritual and belief.
Answer Choices
A. Navajo sand paintings are an expression of the close relationship between nature and the spiritual world in
Navajo culture
B. Sand paintings, which help participants in rituals recall traditional chants, are part of ceremonies designed
to restore beauty and harmony.
C. Whereas Navajo sand paintings are associated with male deities. Navajo weaving involves representations
of female figures such as Spider Woman.
D. Individual Navajo sand paintings typically embody the principles of harmony and disorder.
E. Sand paintings, which are created by Navajo men, are faithful re-creations of earlier works and as such
represent the principle of stability.
F. In Navajo culture, weaving is a female art and is associated with creativity and change.
TPO41-2 Trade and Early State Formation
1. The word "notions " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. ideas
B. rules
C. degrees
D. Traditions
2. According to paragraph 2, Renfrew believed
that one effect of long-distance trade in the Aegean
was
A. a greater effort to control piracy
B. greater cultural similarity throughout the
region
C. a decline in local olive production
D. a decline in the use of luxuries for gift
exchanges
Bartering was a basic trade mechanism for many
thousands of years; often sporadic and usually based
on notions of reciprocity, it involved the mutual
exchange of commodities or objects between
individuals or groups. Redistribution of these goods
through society lay in the hands of chiefs, religious
leaders, or kin groups. Such redistribution was a basic
element in chiefdoms. The change from redistribution
to formal trade —often based on regulated commerce
that perhaps involved fixed prices and even
currency—was closely tied to growing political and
social complexity and hence to the development of
the state in the ancient world. In the 1970s, a number
of archaeologists gave trade a primary role in the rise
of ancient states.
British archaeologist Colin Renfrew attributed the
dramatic flowering of the Minoan civilization on Crete
and through the Aegean to intensified trading contacts
and to the impact of olive and vine cultivation on local
communities. As agricultural economies became morediversified and local food supplies could be purchased
both locally and over longer distances, a far-reaching
economic interdependence resulted. Eventually, this
led to redistribution systems for luxuries and basic
commodities, systems that were organized and
controlled by Minoan rulers from their palaces. As
time went on, the self-sufficiency of communities was
replaced by mutual dependence. Interest in
long-distance trade brought about some cultural
homogeneity from trade and gift exchange, and
perhaps even led to piracy. Thus, intensified trade and
interaction, and the flowering of specialist crafts, in a
complex process of positive feedback, led to much
more complex societies based on palaces, which were
the economic hubs of a new Minoan civilization.
5693 According to paragraph 3, what was a major
problem with Renfrew 's model?
A. He overlooked the fact that only the Minoan
palaces had access to domesticated vines and olives.
B. He wrongly assumed that the introduction of
domesticated vines and olives led to the cultivation of
more land.
C. Trade in domesticated plants was much more
important to the emergence of Minoan palace
economies than he thought.
D. Domesticated vines and olives do not appear
to have been available as early as he thought.
4. What can be inferred from the fact that the
Maya lived in a “relatively uniform environment ”?
A. The communities could not obtain resources
they lacked by trading with each other.
B. The communities 'ceremonial centers were all
organized in much the same way.
C. Increased competition between the
communities to export their local commodities
expanded commercial networks beyond the nearby
highlands.
D. Different communities tended to specialize in
the production of different commodities.
Renfrew's model made some assumptions that are
now discounted. For example, he argued that the
introduction of domesticated vines and olives allowed
a substantial expansion of land under cultivation and
helped to power the emergence of complex society.
Many archaeologists and paleobotanists now question
this view, pointing out that the available evidence for
cultivated vines and olives suggests that they were
present only in the later Bronze Age. Trade,
nevertheless, was probably one of many variables that
led to the emergence of palace economies in Minoan
Crete.
American archaeologist William Rathje developed
a hypothesis that considered an explosion in
long-distance exchange a fundamental cause of Mayan
civilization in Mesoamerica. He suggested that the
lowland Mayan environment was deficient in many
vital resources, among them obsidian, salt, stone for
grinding maize, and many luxury materials. All these
could be obtained from the nearby highlands, from
the Valley of Mexico, and from other regions, if the
necessary trading networks came into being. Such
connections, and the trading expeditions to maintain
them, could not be organized by individual villages.
The Maya lived in a relatively uniform environment,
where every community suffered from the same
resource deficiencies. Thus, argued Rathje, long-
-distance trade networks were organized through local
ceremonial centers and their leaders. In time, this
organization became a state, and knowledge of its
functioning was exportable, as were pottery, tropical
bird feathers, specialized stone materials, and other
local commodities.
5. The word “prime”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. low-lying
B. easily accessible
C. unused
D. high-quality
6. What is the role of paragraph 5 in relation to
paragraph 4?
A. It restates the hypothesis presented in
paragraph 4 and reinforces it with further evidence.
B. It presents evidence that the hypothesis
discussed in paragraph 4 confuses cause and effect.
C. It presents a critical assessment of the
hypothesis presented in paragraph 4.
D. It explains how the hypothesis discussed in
paragraph 4 was initially formulated.
7. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. We now know that ancient trade cannot be
considered a main factor in the rise of civilization,
because no one aspect of it caused change in culture
or commercial practices.
B. We now know that the growth of civilization
was an important factor in causing cultural change and
in improving commercial practices.
C. We now know much more about how ancient
trade and commerce led to cultural changes and the
evolution of commercial practices.
D. We now know much more about the main
factors and agents that led to ancient civilization,
because we know what aspects of trade affected
culture and commercial practices.
Rathje's hypothesis probably explains part of thecomplex process of Mayan state formation, but it
suffers from the objection that suitable alternative
raw materials can be found in the lowlands. It could be,
too, that warfare became a competitive response to
population growth and to the increasing scarcity ofprime agricultural land, and that it played an
important role in the emergence of the Mayan states.
Now that we know much more about ancient
exchange and commerce, we know that, because no
one aspect of trade was an overriding cause of cultural
change or evolution in commercial practices, trade can
never be looked on as a unifying factor or as a primary
agent of ancient civilization .
Many ever-changing
variables affected ancient trade, among them the
demand for goods. There were also the logistics of
transportation, the extent of the trading network, and
the social and political environment. Intricate market
networks channeled supplies along well-defined
routes.
Authorities at both ends might regulate the
profits fed back to the source, providing the incentive
for further transactions. There may or may not have
been a market organization. Extensive long-distance
trade was a consequence rather than a cause of
complex societies.
8. According to paragraph 6, all of the following
statements about trade in ancient civilizations are true
EXCEPT:
A. The spread of trade was influenced by many
variables, none of which was the main cause.
B. Political conditions were more important than
demand for goods in the development of trade.
C. Some markets had clearly established trading
routes.
D. The regulation of profits provided incentives
for future trade.
9. Look at the four squares []that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
But demand for locally unobtainable resources was clearly only a part of the story.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square []to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Various attempts have been made to explore the role that trade played in the rise of ancient
states.



Answer Choices
A. Barter, a basic trade mechanism that involved the direct exchange of goods or services, depended on a
high degree of social complexity.
B. It was only in the 1970s that most archaeologists began to realize that the long-distance trade typical of
Minoan communities varied significantly from that of lowland Mayan communities.
C. Renfrew and Rathje are recognized today for having correctly analyzed the basic relationship between
trade and the emergence of states, even though they were wrong about many details.
D. Renfrew suggested that an organized state emerged in Minoan Crete because of intensified trade, but
current views indicate that trade was probably only one of many variables.
E. Rathje's hypothesis that long-distance trade led to the emergence of a Mayan state has been objected to,
and it is argued that other factors such as warfare may have played an important role too.
F. Current views indicate that trade was not the most important agent of ancient civilization and that
long-distance trade was a result rather than a cause of complex societies.
TPO41-3 Climate of Venus
1. According to paragraph 1, in what major
respect are Venus and Earth different from each
other?
A. Whether carbon dioxide was present in their
original atmospheres
B. How thin their original atmospheres were
C. What their present-day atmospheres mainly
consist of
D. How long ago they first developed an
atmosphere
2. According to paragraph 2, what is one reason
for thinking that at one time, there were significant
amounts of water on Venus?
A. Because of Venus' size and mass, its volcanoes
probably produced much more water vapor than
volcanoes on Earth did.
B. The low temperature of Venus ，early
atmosphere can be explained only by the presence of
water.
C. The presence of carbon dioxide in a planet's
atmosphere is an indicator of water on that planet.
D. Venus probably was struck by roughly as many
comets as Earth was.
Earth has abundant water in its oceans but very
little carbon dioxide in its relatively thin atmosphere.
By contrast, Venus is very dry and its thick atmosphere
is mostly carbon dioxide. The original atmospheres of
both Venus and Earth were derived at least in part
from gases spewed forth, or outgassed, by volcanoes.
The gases that emanate from present-day volcanoes
on Earth , such as Mount Saint Helens, are
predominantly water vapor, carbon dioxide, and sulfur
dioxide. These gases should therefore have been
important parts of the original atmospheres of both
Venus and Earth. Much of the water on both planets is
also thought to have come from impacts from comets,
icy bodies formed in the outer solar system.
In fact, water probably once dominated the
Venusian atmosphere. Venus and Earth are similar in
size and mass, so Venusian volcanoes may well have
outgassed as much water vapor as on Earth, and both
planets would have had about the same number of
comets strike their surfaces. Studies of how stars
evolve suggest that the early Sun was only about 70percent as luminous as it is now, so the temperature in
Venus'early atmosphere must have been quite a bit
lower. Thus water vapor would have been able to
liquefy and form oceans on Venus. But if water vapor
and carbon dioxide were once so common in the
atmospheres of both Earth and Venus, what became
of Earth's carbon dioxide? And what happened to the
water on Venus?
3. The word "luminous' in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A. dense
B. bright
C. large
D. active
4. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. The first question to be answered is how
Earth's atmospheric carbon dioxide either got
dissolved in the oceans or got chemically bound into
carbonate rocks.
B. The fact that Earth 's abundant carbon dioxide
is more often found in carbonate rock than dissolved
in the oceans is the answer to the first question.
C. Earth still has abundant carbon dioxide, but
instead of being in the atmosphere it is now dissolved
in the oceans or chemically bound into ocean rocks.
D. The formation of limestone and marble used
up the carbon dioxide that was dissolved in Earth 's
oceans so that only carbon dioxide in the atmospheric
form remained.
5. According to paragraph 4, what is one factor
that kept the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere of early Venus relatively low?
A. The presence of water vapor clouds
B. The presence of oceans
C. Rapidly increasing temperatures at ground
level
D. Low atmospheric pressures
The answer to the first question is that carbon
dioxide is still found in abundance on Earth, but now,
instead of being in the form of atmospheric carbon
dioxide, it is either dissolved in the oceans or
chemically bound into carbonate rocks, such as the
limestone and marble that formed in the oceans. If
Earth became as hot as Venus, much of its carbon
dioxide would be boiled out of the oceans and baked
out of the crust. Our planet would soon develop a
thick, oppressive carbon dioxide atmosphere much
like that of Venus.
6. The phrase "mechanism for " in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A. means of
B. importance of
C. need for
D. benefits of
7. According to paragraph 6, extremely high
temperatures increased the amount of carbon dioxide
in Venus'atmosphere by
A.increasing the rate at which carbon dioxide was
outgassed
B.baking out carbon dioxide from carbonate rocks
C.creating additional water vapor
D.replacing the previous mechanisms for
removing carbon dioxide with less effective ones
To answer the question about Venus' lack of water, we
must return to the early history of the planet. Just as
on present-day Earth, the oceans of Venus limited the
amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide by dissolving it
in the oceans and binding it up in carbonate rocks. But
being closer to the Sun than Earth is, enough of the
liquid water on Venus would have vaporized to create
a thick cover of water vapor clouds. Since water vapor
is a greenhouse gas, this humid atmosphere —perhaps
denser than Earth 's present-day atmosphere, but far
less dense than the atmosphere that envelops Venus
today—would have efficiently trapped heat from the
Sun. At first, this would have had little effect on the
oceans of Venus. Although the temperature would
have climbed above 100 °C, the boiling point of water
at sea level on Earth, the added atmospheric pressure
from water vapor would have kept the water in Venus'
oceans in the liquid state.
This hot and humid state of affairs may havepersisted for several hundred million years. But as the
Sun's energy output slowly increased over time, the
temperature at the surface would eventually have
risen above 374 °C.Above this temperature, no
matter what the atmospheric pressure, Venus' oceans
would have begun to evaporate, and the added water
vapor in the atmosphere would have increased the
greenhouse effect. This would have made the
temperature even higher and caused the oceans to
evaporate faster, producing more water vapor. That,
in turn, would have further intensified the greenhouse
effect and made the temperature climb higher still. 
8. The passage supports the idea that the basic
reason that Venus and Earth are now so different from
each other is that
A. early Venus had more frequent volcanic
outgassing than early Earth did
B. early Venus had far less liquid water than early
Earth did
C. volcanic activity stopped relatively early on
Venus but continued on Earth
D. Venus is closer to the Sun than Earth is
Once Venus' oceans disappeared, so did the
mechanism for removing carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. With no oceans to dissolve it, outgassed
carbon dioxide began to accumulate in the
atmosphere, intensifying the greenhouse effect even
more. Temperatures eventually became high enough
to "bake out" any carbon dioxide that was trapped in
carbonate rocks. This liberated carbon dioxide formed
the thick atmosphere of present-day Venus. Over time,
the rising temperatures would have leveled off, solar
ultraviolet radiation having broken down atmospheric
water vapor molecules into hydrogen and oxygen.
With all the water vapor gone, the greenhouse effect
would no longer have accelerated.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
This cycle of rising temperatures following an increase in greenhouse gases is known as the runaway
greenhouse effect.
Where would the sentence best fit?
10.Directions: Select from the seven phrases below the 2 phrases that correctly characterize early Venus and
the 3 phrases that correctly characterize present-day Venus. Drag each phrase you select into the appropriate
column of the table. Two of the phrases will NOT be used. This question is worth 3 points. Drag your answer
choices to the spaces where they belong. To remove an answer choice, click on it.
Early Venus Present-day Venus



Answer Choices
A. High percentage of water vapor in the atmosphere
B. Carbon dioxide present only in atmospheric form
C. an atmosphere quite similar to that of early Earth
D. Very dense but relatively cool atmosphere
E. Completely covered with water
F. Complete absence of surface water
G. Essentially stable temperatures
TPO42
TPO42-1 Geographic Isolation of Species
1. According to paragraph 1, allopatric speciation
is possible when
A. a population contains all the different genes
present in a species at a particular time
B. a population becomes isolated due to the
presence of a geographic barrier
C. genetic mixing begins to occur in previously
separate populations of a species
D. a species is successful in crossing a geographic
barrier
2. How is paragraph 2 related to paragraph 1?
A. Paragraph 2 points out a number of ways in
which the phenomenon of geographic isolation
mentioned in paragraph 1 can occur
B. Paragraph 2 identifies discoveries that led to
the conclusion presented in paragraph 1 that
geographic isolation has played a role in the origin of
many species
C. Paragraph 2 provides evidence supporting the
statement in paragraph 1 that a population can follow
its own evolutionary course once its gene pool
becomes isolated
D. Paragraph 2 explains why the term “allopatric ”
was adopted to describe the method of speciation
described in paragraph 1Biologist Ernst Mayr defined a species as “an
actually or potentially interbreeding population that
does not interbreed with other such populations when
there is opportunity to do so. ”A key event in the
origin of many species is the separation of a
population with its gene pool (all of the genes in a
population at any one time) from other populations of
the same species, thereby preventing population
interbreeding. With its gene pool isolated, a separate
population can follow its own evolutionary course. In
the formation of many species, the initial isolation of a
population seems to have been a geographic barrier.
This mode of evolving new species is called allopatric
speciation.
Many factors can isolate a population geographically.
A.mountain range may emerge and gradually split a
population of organisms that can inhabit only lowland
lakes, certain fish populations might become isolated
in this way. Similarly, a creeping glacier may gradually
divide a population, or a land bridge such as the
Isthmus of Panama may form and separate the marine
life in the ocean waters on either side.
3. In paragraph 3, the author contrasts a variety
of organisms to illustrate which of the following
points?
A. Geographic barriers are less likely to keep
apart populations of plants than populations of
animals
B. Geographic barriers are more likely to keep
apart populations of large organisms than populations
of small organisms
C. Some members of a species are able to cross
geographic barriers, while other members of the same
species are not
D. The effectiveness of geographic barriers in
keeping organisms apart depends on an organism 's
ability to move across barriers
4. Paragraph 3 supports the idea that white-tailed
antelope squirrels and Hams' antelope squirrels have
which of the following in common?
A. They are the two smallest rodents now found
in the southwestern United States.
B. They have white coloring underneath their tails
C. They cannot cross the Grand Canyon
D. They cannot survive in desert conditions
How formidable must a geographic barrier be to
keep populations apart? It depends on the ability of
the organisms to move across barriers. Birds and
coyotes can easily cross mountains and rivers. The
passage of wind-blown tree pollen is also not hindered
by such barriers, and the seeds of many plants may be
carried back and forth on animals In contrast, small
rodents may find a deep canyon or a wide river an
effective barrier. For example, the Grand Canyon, in
the southwestern United States, separate the range of
the while-tailed antelope squirrel from that of the
closely related Harris 'antelope squirrel. Smaller, with
a shorter tail that is white underneath, the
white-tailed antelope squirrel inhabits deserts north
of the canyon and west of the Colorado River in
southern California Hams' antelope squirrel has a
more limited range in deserts south of the Grand
Canyon.
Geographic isolation creates opportunities for
new species to develop, but it does not necessarily
lead to new species because speciation occurs only
when the gene pool undergoes enough changes to
establish reproductive barriers between the isolated
population and its parent population. The likelihood of
allopatric speciation increases when a population is
small as well as isolated, making it more likely than a
large population to have its gene pool changed
substantially. For example, in less than two million
years, small populations of stray animals and plantsfrom the South American mainland that managed to
colonize the Galapagos Islands gave rise to all the
species that now inhabit the islands.
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information
A. Geographic isolation is sometimes but not
always the reason for the creation of reproductive
barriers between a parent population and the
populations descended from it
B. Genetic changes in a geographical isolated
population do not necessarily make the population
look different enough from its parent population to be
considered a new species
C. Geographical isolation allows the separated
populations to evolve independently of each other
and so can lead to the formation of new species
D. Geographic isolation can lead to new species
only if the gene pool of the isolated population
changes enough to prevent it from reproducing with
the parent population6. The word “managed ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A. were able
B. were forced
C. arrived
D. expanded
When oceanic islands are far enough apart to
permit populations to evolve in isolation, but close
enough to allow occasional dispersions to occur, they
are effectively outdoor laboratories of evolution. The
Galapagos island chain is one of the world 's greatest
showcases of evolution. Each island was born from
underwater volcanoes and was gradually covered by
organisms derived from strays that rode the ocean
currents and winds from other islands and continents.
7. Paragraph 5 supports the idea that the Galapagos
island chain was able to become “one of the world's
greatest showcases of evolution ”primarily because of
A. the richness of the volcanic soil of each of the
islands in the chain
B. the distance of the individual islands from each
other and from the mainland
C. the relativity long time it took for the islands to
become covered by organisms
D. the outdoor laboratories that scientists have
built on the islands to study evolution
8. According to paragraph 6, what is true about
the thirteen species of Galapagos finches?
A. All thirteen species are now found on most of
the Galapagos Islands
B. All thirteen species are descended from the
same population of ancestral birds
C. All thirteen species evolved on the island that
was originally colonized by finches from the mainland.
D. All thirteen species occur only in small,
completely isolated populations.
Organisms can also be carried to islands by other
organisms, such as sea birds that travel long distances
with seeds clinging to their feathers.
The species on the Galapagos Islands today, most
of which occur nowhere else, descended from
organisms that floated, flew, or were blown over the
sea from the South American mainland. For instance,
the Galapagos island chain has a total of thirteen
species of closely related birds called Galapagos
finches. These birds have many similarities but differ
in their feeding habits and their beak type, which is
correlated with what they eat. Accumulated evidence
indicates that all thirteen finch species evolved from a
single small population of ancestral birds that
colonized one of the islands. Completely isolated on
the island after migrating from the mainland, the
founder population may have undergone significant
changes in its gene pool and become a new species.
Later, a few individuals of this new species may have
been blown by storms to a neighboring island.
Isolated on this second island, the second founder
population could have evolved into a second new
species, which could later recolonize the island from
which its founding population emigrated. Today each
Galapagos island has multiple species of finches, with
as many as ten on some islands. 
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage
This process of speciation and colonization could have been repeated over and over again, gradually
involving all the islands in the chain.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. The question is worth 2 points.
The geographic isolation of a population can result in the rise of a new species.
Answer Choices
A.Isolation can result when a geographic barrier forms and splits a population or when a few organisms
somehow get carried across an existing geographic barrier and form a new population
B.Speciation is more likely when an isolated population is small because significant genetic changes are more
likely to occur in a small population than in a large one
C.Because of the geographic isolation of the Galapagos Islands, the species that now inhabit them have gene
pools that have not changed very much since the islands were first populated.
D.Fish populations are more easily isolated by geographic barriers than are populations of most other
organisms because fish cannot move across areas where there is no water.
E.The Galapagos Islands are well situated for speciation because they provide opportunities for population
isolation while also making occasional dispersions between islands possible.
F.Evidence indicates that the first organisms to reach the Galapagos Islands were probably a small population
of finches that, in less than two million years of isolation, evolved into thirteen species.
TPO42-2 Callisto and Ganymede
1. According to paragraph 1, which of the
following statements about Callisto is true?
A. It is the satellite closest to Jupiter's surface
B. Its surface temperature is constant at all times
of the day.
C. It has the same mass and diameter as the
planet Mercury
D. It completes one rotation every seventeen
days.
2. According to paragraph 1, how do scientists
know that Callisto is made up largely of ice?
A. A sample of its interior was taken by the
Galileo spacecraft in the late 1990s
B. It has too low a density to contain much rocky
metallic material
C. With a noontime surface temperature of only
about .140 °C. the ice on it never melts
D. All of the bodies in the Jovian system are icy,
because they are so far from the Sun.
3. Why does the author provide the information
that“It is much easier for an icy body to differentiate
than for a rocky one ”?
A. To support the claim that all of the big icy
moons are differentiated
B. To suggest that Callisto may be a rocky body
rather than an icy one
C. To explain why scientists expected Callisto to
be differentiated
D. To refute the claim that Callisto could not
differentiate because it was frozen solid
4. All of the following questions are answered in
paragraph 2 EXCEPT:
A. Why was Callisto frozen solid before
differentiation was complete?
B. What allows the process of differentiation to
get started?
C. Why is it easier for an icy body to differentiatethan a rocky one?
D. How do astronomers know that Callisto lacks a
dense core?
From 1996 to 1999, the Galileo spacecraft passed
through the Jovian system, providing much
information about Jupiter's satellites. Callisto, the
outermost of Jupiter's four largest satellites, orbits the
planet in seventeen days at a distance from Jupiter of
two million kilometers. Like our own Moon, Callisto
rotates in the same period as it revolves, so it always
keeps the same face toward Jupiter. Its noontime
surface temperature is only about -140 °C, so water ice
is stable on its surface year-round. Callisto has a
diameter of 4.820 kilometers, almost the same as that
of Mercury. Its mass is only one-third as great, which
means its density must be only one-third as great as
well. This tells us that Callisto has far less of the rocky
metallic materials found in the inner planets and must
instead be an icy body through much of its interior.
Callisto has not fully differentiated, meaning
separated into layers of different density materials.
Astronomers can tell that it lacks a dense core from
the details of its gravitational pull on the Galileo
spacecraft during several very close flybys. This fact
surprised scientists, who expected that all the big icymoons would be differentiated. It is much easier for
an icy body to differentiate than for a rocky one , since
the melting temperature of ice is so low. Only a little
heating will soften the ice and get the process started,
allowing the rock and metal to sink to the center and
the slushy ice to float to the surface. Yet Callisto seems
to have frozen solid before the process of
differentiation was complete.
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. It should not be assumed that surface ice has
the same characteristics wherever it is found
B. Surface ice and rock are much more similar in
temperature in the outer solar system than they are
on Earth.
C. The further away surface ice is from the Sun,
the more its temperature differs from that of the
warmer ice on Earth
D. In the cold of the outer solar system, surface
ice is so hard it behaves more like rock than like the
warmer ice on Earth
6. According to paragraph 3, how is Callisto
different from all other planet-sized objects in the
solar system?
A. It can form and retain impact craters on its icy
surface
B. It has ice glaciers that do not flow or deform.
C. It has never had the interior forces required for
geological evolution.
D. It is more than four billion years old.
7. According to paragraph 4, each of the
following provides evidence about Ganymede's
interior EXCEPT
A. Ganymede's large size
B. measurements of Ganymede's gravity field
C. the fact that Ganymede has a magnetic field
D. the fact that Ganymede continues to be
geologically active
Like our Moon's highlands, the surface of Callisto
is covered with impact craters. The survival of these
craters tells us that an icy object can form and retain
impact craters in its surface. In thinking of ice so far
from the Sun, it is important not to judge its behavior
from that of the much warmer ice we know on Earth;
at the temperatures of the outer solar system, ice on
the surface is nearly as hard as rock, and behaves
similarly. Ice on Callisto does not deform or flow like
ice in glaciers on Earth. Callisto is unique among the
planet-sized objects of the solar system in its absence
of interior forces to drive geological evolution. The
satellite was born dead and has remained geologically
dead for more than four billion years.
Ganymede, another of Jupiter's satellites and the
largest in our solar system, is also cratered, but less so
than Callisto. About one-quarter of its surface seems
to be as old and heavily cratered; the rest formed
more recently, as we can tell by the sparse covering of
impact craters as well as the relative freshness of the
craters.
Ganymede is a differentiated world, like the
terrestrial planets. Measurements of its gravity field
tell us that the rock and metal sank to form a core
about the size of our Moon, with a mantle and crust of
ice floating above it. In addition, the Galileo
spacecraft discovered that Ganymede has a magnetic
field, the signature of a partially molten interior.
Ganymede is not a dead world, but rather a place of
continuing geological activity powered by an internal
heat source. Much of its surface may be as young as
half a billion years.
8. According to paragraph 6, the differences in
how Callisto and Ganymede evoked are most probably
due to differences in their
A. size and internal heating
B. distance from Jupiter
C. chemical and physical composition
D. age
The younger terrain is the result of tectonic and
volcanic forces. Some features formed when the crust
cracked, flooding many of the craters with water from
the interior. Extensive mountain ranges were formed
from compression of the crust, forming long ridges
with parallel valleys spaced one to two kilometers
apart. In some places older impact craters were split
and pulled apart. There are even indications of
large-scale crustal movements that are similar to the
plate tectonics of Earth.
Why is Ganymede different from Callisto?
Possibly the small difference in size and internal
heating between the two led to this divergence in
their evolution. But more likely the gravity of Jupiter is
to blame for Ganymede's continuing geological activity.
Ganymede is close enough to Jupiter that tidal forces
from the giant planet may have episodically heated its
interior and triggered major convulsions on its crust.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage
The difference between Ganymede and Callisto, however, extend much further below the surface of the
satellites.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage. (2)
10.【Directions 】Select from the seven sentences below, the two sentences that correctly characterize
endogenous rivers and the three sentences that correctly characterize exogenous rivers. Drag each sentence you
select into the appropriate column of the table. Two of the sentences will NOT be used. This question is worth 3
points.
Callisto Ganymede
 5  3
 7  1
 4
Answer Choice
1. It has a core that consists mainly of rock and metal.
2. It may have formed as recently as half a billion years ago
3. Its interior is not fully solid
4. Its evolution has probably been strongly influenced by Jupiter's gravity
5. It always keeps the same face toward Jupiter as it orbits the planet
6. Its crust is covered by slow-moving glaciers
7. Its entire surface is heavily cratered
TPO42-3 Explaining Dinosaur Extinction
1. In paragraph 1, why does the author include a
discussion of when flowering plants evolved?
A. To help explain why some scientists believe
that the development of flowering plants led to
dinosaur extinction
B. To cast doubt on the theory that the
development of flowering plants caused dinosaurs to
become extinct
C. To suggest that dinosaurs were able to survive
for as long as they did because of the availability of
flowering plants
D. To emphasize that duckbill dinosaurs and
horned dinosaurs were the first dinosaurs to become
extinct2. The word “allegedly ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. inevitably
B. gradually
C. supposedly
D. increasingly
3. According to paragraph 1 the extinction of the
dinosaurs is unlikely to have been the result of
competition from mammals because
A. mammals would not have been capable of
eating dinosaur eggs
B. mammals did not appear in any significant
numbers until after the Late Triassic
C. mammals and dinosaurs did not, in fact,
compete for any of the same resources
D. mammals and dinosaurs lived together for
roughly 120 million years before the extinction
Dinosaurs rapidly became extinct about 65
million years ago as part of a mass extinction known
as the K-T event, because it is associated with a
geological signature known as the K-T boundary,
usually a thin band of sedimentation found in various
parts of the world (K is the traditional abbreviation for
the Cretaceous, derived from the German name
Kreidezeit). Many explanations have been proposed
for why dinosaurs became extinct. For example,
some have blamed dinosaur extinction on the
development of flowering plants, which were
supposedly more difficult to digest and could have
caused constipation or indigestion —except that
flowering plants first evolved in the Early Cretaceous,
about 60 million years before the dinosaurs died out.
In fact, several scientists have suggested that the
duckbill dinosaurs and horned dinosaurs, with their
complex battery of grinding teeth, evolved to exploit
this new resource of rapidly growing flowering plants
Others have blamed extinction on competition fromthe mammals, which allegedly ate all the dinosaur
eggs—except that mammals and dinosaurs appeared
at the same time in the Late Triassic, about 190 million
years ago, and there is no reason to believe that
mammals suddenly acquired a taste for dinosaur eggs
after 120 million years of coexistence. Some
explanations (such as the one stating that dinosaurs all
died of diseases) fail because there is no way to
scientifically test them, and they cannot move beyond
the realm of speculation and guesswork.
4. According to paragraph 2, each of the
following became extinct during the K-T event EXCEPT
A. early species of whales
B. marine reptiles
C. various species of clams
D. many species of land plants5. The word “strictly " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. exclusively
B. mainly
C. initially
D. Wrongly
This focus on explaining dinosaur extinction
misses an important point: the extinction at the end of
the Cretaceous was a global event that killed off
organisms up and down the food chain. It wiped out
many kinds of plankton in the ocean and many marine
organisms that lived on the plankton at the base of
the food chain. These included a variety of clams andsnails, and especially the ammonites , a group of
shelled squidlike creatures that dominated the
Mesozoic seas and had survived many previous mass
extinctions. The K-T event marked the end of the
marine reptiles, such as the mosasaurs and the
plesiosaurs, which were the largest creatures that had
ever lived in the seas and which ruled the seas longbefore whales evolved. On land, there was also a crisis
among the land plants, in addition to the
disappearance of dinosaurs. So any event that can
explain the destruction of the base of the food chain
(plankton in the ocean, plants on land) can better
explain what happened to organisms at the top of the
food chain, such as the dinosaurs. By contrast, anyexplanation that focuses strictly on the dinosaurs
completely misses the point. The Cretaceous
extinctions were a global phenomenon, and dinosaurs
were just a part of a bigger picture.
6. The word “crisis”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. collapse
B. disturbance
C. critical situation
D. loss
7. How does paragraph 3 relate to paragraph 2?
A. Paragraph 3 provides an alternative
explanation to the one provided in paragraph 2.
B. Paragraph 3 provides an explanation that
satisfies the conditions set forth in paragraph 2.
C. Paragraph 3 provides the facts to support the
theory presented in paragraph 2.
D. Paragraph 3 presents a theory that calls into
question the position described in paragraph 2.
8. Paragraph 3 strongly suggests that if the bolide
impact theory is correct, the majority of the
extinctions associated with the K-T event resulted
from
A. sunlight being blocked for months by dust and
smoke in Earth's atmosphere
B. widespread flooding that followed the
displacement of huge volumes of seawater
C. the leveling of the landscape by the shock
wave that was generated when the bolide struck Earth
D. the rise in global temperatures caused by thefires that burned much of the landscape
According to one theory, the Age of Dinosaurs ended
suddenly 65 million years ago when a giant rock from
space plummeted to Earth. Estimated to be ten to
fifteen kilometers in diameter, this bolide (either a
comet or an asteroid) was traveling at cosmic speeds
of 20-70 kilometers per second, or 45,000-156,000
miles per hour. Such a huge mass traveling at such
tremendous speeds carries an enormous amount of
energy. When the bolide struck this energy was
released and generated a huge shock wave that
leveled everything for thousands of kilometers around
the impact and caused most of the landscape to burst
into flames. The bolide struck an area of the Yucatan
Peninsula of Mexico known as Chicxulub, excavating a
crater 15-20 kilometers deep and at least 170
kilometers in diameter. The impact displaced huge
volumes of seawater, causing much flood damage in
the Caribbean. Meanwhile, the bolide itself excavated
100 cubic kilometers of rock and debris from the site,
which rose to an altitude of 100 kilometers. Most of it
fell back immediately, but some of it remained as dust
in the atmosphere for months. This material, along
with the smoke from the fires, shrouded Earth,
creating a form of
nuclear winter. According to computerized
climate models, global temperatures fell to near thefreezing point, photosynthesis halted , and most plants
on land and in the sea died. With the bottom of the
food chain destroyed, dinosaurs could not survive.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage
Some explanations seem plausible until the facts are considered.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. The question is worth 2 points.
Over the years, scientists have proposed a number of theories as to why dinosaurs suddenly became extinct
about 65 million years ago.
Answer Choices
A.Many explanations for dinosaur extinction have been proposed, but most of them are either called into
question by known facts or are merely unsupported hypotheses.
B.Focusing on dinosaurs misses the point that the extinction, at about the same time, of the shelled squidlike
creatures that dominated the Mesozoic seas was far more scientifically significant.
C.Computerized climate models of global temperature fluctuations support the theory that a huge rock from
space hit the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico about 65 million years ago.
D.Although mammals and dinosaurs appeared at about the same time in the Late Triassic, the K-T event,
which marked the end of the dinosaurs, apparently had relatively little impact on mammals.
E.Any satisfactory explanation of the mass extinction of dinosaurs must take into account the fact that the
disappearance of the dinosaurs was part of a global mass extinction.
F.A huge bolide striking Earth would have created conditions in which most plants would have died, thus
explaining the mass extinction of organisms— including dinosaurs— further up the food chain.
TPO43
TPO43-1 The Empire of Alexander the Great
1. According to paragraph 1, Alexander the Great
did which of the following?
A.Regulated the movement and resettlement in
southwest Asia of thousands of Greek people
B.Opened up opportunities in new markets for
traders and artisans
C.Created new restrictions on trade
D.Encouraged Greek citizens to choose military
careers over careers in trade
2. In paragraph 2,the author mentions the
libraries at Antioch and Alexandria in order to
A.provide evidence that the library was a cultural
institution in the East before it spread to the West
B.explain why it was important for Greek to
become the great international language
C.identify two of the sources of Greek cultural
influence within Alexander 's empire
D.support the claim that the Greeks transformed
Middle Eastern garrisons and military posts into
cultural centers
In 334 B.C. Alexander the Great took his Greek
armies to the east and in only a few years completed
his creation of an empire out of much of southwest
Asia In the new empire, barriers to trade and the
movement of peoples were removed; markets were
put in touch with one another. In the next generation
thousands of Greek traders and artisans would enter
this wider world to seek their fortunes. Alexander 's
actions had several important consequences for the
region occupied by the empire.
The first of these was the expansion of Greek
civilization throughout the Middle East. Greek became
the great international language. Towns and cities
were established not only as garrisons (military posts)but as centers for the diffusion of Greek language,
literature, and thought, particularly through libraries,
as at Antioch (in modern Turkey) and the most famous
of all, at Alexandria in Egypt, which would be the
finest in the world for the next thousand years.
3. According to paragraph 3 ，Plato believed that the
ideal city-state should be
A.governed by a ruling body of about 5,000 city
leaders with a total population of no more than
100,000
B.led by the most qualified individual
C.governed by the group of citizens with the most
knowledge about the issues of the day
D.small enough so that everyone would know
each other4. Why does the author mention "The
philosopher Aristotle"?
A.To provide additional evidence that the ancient
Greeks believed that political units must be small
B.To demonstrate the accuracy of philosophers '
predictions about the end of the classical Greek
city-state
C.To show how changes in the city-state system
from the fifth to the third century B C. were reflected
in the ideas of its philosophers
D.To support the claim that small city-states were
ideally suited to produce philosophical inquiry
Second, this internationalism spelled the end of
the classical Greek city-state —— the unit of
government in ancient Greece —— and everything it
stood for. Most city-states had been quite small in
terms of citizenry, and this was considered to be a
good thing. The focus of life was the agora, the open
marketplace where assemblies could be held and
where issues of the day, as well as more fundamental
topics such as the purpose of government or the
relationship between law and freedom, could be
discussed and decisions made by individuals in person.
The philosopher Plato (428-348 B.C.) felt that the ideal
city-state should have about 5,000 citizens, because to
the Greeks it was important that everyone in the
community should know each other. In decision
making, the whole body of citizens together would
have the necessary knowledge in order generally to
reach the right decision, even though the individualmight not be particularly qualified to decide. The
philosopher Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), who lived at a
time when the city-state system was declining ,
believed that a political entity of 100,000 simply
would not be able to govern itself.
5. According to paragraph 4, Alexander's empire was
characterized by all of the following EXCEPT
A.decreased need for military control
B.growing professionalism
C.growth of cities
D.specialization in trades
6. According to paragraph 5, religion in the Greek
city-state involved
A.a set of rules governing behavior
B.a detailed conception of life after death
C.rituals related to significant life events
D.worship of gods who were not like humans
This implied that the city-state was based on the
idea that citizens were not specialists but had multiple
interests and talents—— each a so-called
jack-of-all-trades who could engage in many areas of
life and politics. It implied a respect for the wholeness
of life and a consequent dislike of specialization. It
implied economic and military self-sufficiency. But
with the development of trade and commerce in
Alexander 's empire came the growth of cities; it was
no longer possible to be a jack-of-all-trades. One
now had to specialize, and with specialization came
professionalism. There were getting to be too many
persons to know, an easily observable community of
interests was being replaced by a multiplicity of
interests. The city-state was simply too "small-time."
Third, Greek philosophy was opened up to thephilosophy and religion of the East At the peak of the
Greek city-state, religion played an important part. Its
gods—such as Zeus, father of the gods, and his wife
Hera—were thought of very much as being like
human beings but with superhuman abilities. Their
worship was linked to the rituals connected with one 's
progress through life —birth, marriage, and death —
and with invoking protection against danger, making
prophecies, and promoting healing, rather than to any
code of behavior. Nor was there much of a theory of
afterlife.
7.The word "propose " in the passage is closest in
meaningto
A.suggest
B.deny
C.consider
D.question
8.Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Assemblies were held in the agora to discuss
some issues of the day, but more fundamental
questions were decided by key individuals.
B. In a culture where philosophical discussions
were frequent, some individuals questioned the value
of a life focused on the marketplace.
C. Life centered around the agora, an open
marketplace and site for public debate, where
individuals could participate in decision making.
D.The focus of individuals was on fundamental
topics such as the purpose of government and the
connection between law and freedom.
Even before Alexander 's time, a life spent in the
service of their city-state no longer seemed ideal to
Greeks The Athenian philosopher Socrates (470-399
B.C.) was the first person in Greece to propose a
morality based on individual conscience rather than
the demands of the state, and for this he was accused
of not believing in the city 's gods and so corrupting
the youth, and he was condemned to death. Greek
philosophy —or even a focus on conscience —might
complement religion but was no substitute for it, and
this made Greeks receptive to the religious systems of
the Middle East, even if they never adopted them
completely. The combination of the religious instinct
of Asia with the philosophic spirit of Greece spread
across the world in the era after Alexander 's death,
blending the culture of the Middle East with the
culture of Greece.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Likewise, the collective decision-making process of the open marketplace was no longer practical.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions : An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points .
Alexander the Great 's creation of a vast empire had important consequences for Greece and the
conquered areas of southwest Asia.
Answer choices
A.Scholars from Antioch, Alexandria, and other Middle Eastern cultural centers came to Greece to study the
Greek language and culture.
B.Increasing urbanization and the elimination of trade barriers meant the end of the Greek city-state and the
creation of a much larger political and economic body.
C.The professionalism and specialization so prized by the ancient Greeks were replaced by a more generalized
philosophy of education in the empire.
D.The expansion of Alexander 's empire led to the diffusion of Greek language, literature, and thought
throughout the Middle East.
E.The empire saw the birth of a new culture, merging Greek philosophical ideas with the religious spirit of
Asia.
F.Religion played an important part in the expansion of the empire, as Alexander introduced Zeus and the
other Greek gods to Asia.
TPO43-2 The Origin of Petroleum
1. The word "trapped " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.hidden
B.destroyed
C.caught
D.found
2. All of the following are cited in paragraph 2 as
evidence that petroleum is a product of the
decomposition of organic matter EXCEPT
A.the amount of organic matter found in layers of mud
belowthe seafloor
B.the chemical changes that occur in oil and natural gas
aftertheyhaveformed
C.theopticalpropertiesofoil
D.the fact that oil contains nitrogen and other
compoundsbelievedto beof organicorigin
Petroleum is defined as a gaseous, liquid, and
semisolid naturally occurring substance that consists
chiefly of hydrocarbons (chemical compounds of
carbon and hydrogen). Petroleum is therefore a term
that includes both oil and natural gas. Petroleum is
nearly always found in marine sedimentary rocks. In
the ocean, microscopic phytoplankton (tiny floating
plants) and bacteria (simple, single-celled organisms)
are the principal sources of organic matter that istrapped and buried in sediment. Most of the organic
matter is buried in clay that is slowly converted to a
fine-grained sedimentary rock known as shale. During
this conversion, organic compounds are transformed
to oil and natural gas.
Sampling on the continental shelves and along
the base of the continental slopes has shown that fine
muds beneath the seafloor contain up to 8 percent
organic matter. Two additional kinds of evidence
support the hypothesis that petroleum is a product of
the decomposition of organic matter: oil possesses
optical properties known only in hydrocarbons derived
from organic matter, and oil contains nitrogen and
certain compounds believed to originate only in living
matter.
A complex sequence of chemical reactions is
involved in converting the original solid organic matter
to oil and gas, and additional chemical changes may
occur in the oil and gas even after they have formed. 
3. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A.When oil and gas are squeezed out of the rock
in which they originated, it is probably because the
layer of rock above them is much more permeable
than shale.
B.Sandstones, which are made of quartz grains,
and limestones, which are made of carbonate
minerals, can hold much more oil and gas than any
shale can.
C.When they are squeezed from the shale in
which they were formed, oil and gas move easily into
the much more permeable layers of sandstone or
limestone above.
D.Oil and gas are squeezed out of sandstones,
consisting of quartz grains, and migrate readily into
limestones, which consist of carbonate minerals and
are much more permeable.
4. Why does the author include the information
that "The force of molecular attraction between oil
and quartz or carbonate minerals is weaker than that
between water and quartz or carbonate minerals."?
A.To help explain why petroleum behaves
differently from water in bodies of sandstone and
limestone
B.To illustrate why petroleum migrates more
rapidly through sandstone than it does through
limestone
C.To help explain how water and petroleum can
mix in certain aquifers
D.To account for the different molecular
structures of oil and water
It is now well established that petroleum
migrates through aquifers and can become trapped in
reservoirs. Petroleum migration is analogous to
groundwater migration. When oil and gas are
squeezed out of the shale in which they originated
and enter a body of sandstone or limestone
somewhere above, they migrate readily because
sandstones (consisting of quartz grains) and
limestones (consisting of carbonate minerals) are
much more permeable than any shale. The force of
molecular attraction between oil and quartz or
carbonate minerals is weaker than that between
water and quartz or carbonate minerals. Hence,
because oil and water do not mix, water remains
fastened to the quartz or carbonate grains, while oil
occupies the central parts of the larger openings in the
porous sandstone or limestone. Because oil is lighter
than water, it tends to glide upward past the
carbonate- and quartz-held water. In this way, oil
becomes segregated from the water; when itencounters a trap, it can form a pool.
6. Paragraph 4 supports which of the following
statements about future petroleum discoveries?
A.Less petroleum will be found than in the past
because the ratio of petroleum pools to volume of
sediment will decrease.
B.Most of the petroleum will come from rocks
that are less than 65 million years old.
C.Petroleum that has leaked away from older
rocks will be the source of most new discoveries.
D.More petroleum will become available because
the amount of trapped organic matter will increase.
7. The phrase "is an extremely controversial
question " in the passage is closest in meaning to
A.is a question of great importance
B.is a question causing strong disagreement
C.is a question that has existed for a long time
Dis a question composed of many related parts
8. According to paragraph 5, eastern Texas is an
example of a geologic region where
A.oil islocatedbuthasnotyetbeenpumpedout
B.experts accurately predicted the rock types and
structuresfoundthere
C.thevolumeofoilcan onlybeguessedat
D.intensiveoilexploration hasoccurredovera longtime
Most of the petroleum that forms in sediments
does not find a suitable trap and eventually makes its
way, along with groundwater, to the surface of the sea.
It is estimated that no more than 0.1 percent of all the
organic matter originally buried in a sediment is
eventually trapped in an oil pool. It is not surprising,
therefore, that the highest ratio of oil and gas pools to
volume of sediment is found in rock no older than 2.5
million years— young enough so that little of the
petroleum has leaked away —and that nearly 60
percent of all oil and gas discovered so far has been
found in strata that formed in the last 65 million years.
This does not mean that older rocks produced less
petroleum; it simply means that oil in older rocks has
had a longer time in which to leak away.
How much oil is there in the world? This is an
extremely controversial question . Many billions of
barrels of oil have already been pumped out of the
ground. A lot of additional oil has been located by
drilling but is still waiting to be pumped out. Possibly a
great deal more oil remains to be found by drilling.
Unlike coal, the volume of which can be accurately
estimated, the volume of undiscovered oil can only be
guessed at. Guesses involve the use of accumulated
experience from a century of drilling. Knowing how
much oil has been found in an intensively drilled area,
such as eastern Texas, experts make estimates of
probable volumes in other regions where rock types
and structures are similar to those in eastern Texas.
Using this approach and considering all the
sedimentary basins of the world, experts estimate that
somewhere between 1,500 and 3,000 billion barrels of
oil will eventually be discovered.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Because such muds are a major source of petroleum, scientists believe that petroleum originated as living
organisms.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions : An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage This question is worth 2 points .
Petroleum, which includes both oil and natural gas, can be a gaseous, liquid, or semisolid substance.
Answer Choices
A.Petroleum comes from organic matter that has undergone a complex series of chemical changes under the
seafloor.
B.Although most of the petroleum formed leaks away into the ocean, some migrates from shale to sandstone
or limestone, and is caught in pools.
C.Porous rocks made of quartz or carbonate minerals are particularly likely to house oil pools because of their
strong molecular attraction with oil.
D.Petroleum forms best when organic matter is evenly distributed over a large area and does not exceed 8
percent of the material in the clay.
E.More than 60 percent of the petroleum discovered so far has been found in rocks that are less than
two-and-a-half million years old.
FIt is difficult to estimate the total amount of petroleum in the world, but experts believe that 1,500-3,000
billion barrels will eventually be discovered.
TPO43-3 El Nino
1.The word "approaches " in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.nears
B.crosses
C.travelsalong
D.leaves
2.Which of the following questions about the El Ni ño
phenomenonis
NOTansweredin paragraph2 ?
A.Why is the El Niflo phenomenon called El
Nirto?
B.How do fishers spend their time during the El
Nifio season?
C.How do coastal fish obtain enough nutrients
during the El Nifio season?
D.Is the temperature of coastal waters different
during the El Niflo season than it is the rest of the
year?The cold Humboldt Current of the Pacific Ocean
flows toward the equator along the coasts of Ecuador
and Peru in South America. When the current
approaches the equator, the westward-flowing trade
winds cause nutrient-rich cold water along the coast
to rise from deeper depths to more shallow ones. This
upwelling of water has economic repercussions.
Fishing, especially for anchovies, is a major local
industry.
Every year during the months of December and
January, a weak, warm countercurrent replaces the
normally cold coastal waters. Without the upwelling of
nutrients from below to feed the fish, fishing comes to
a standstill. Fishers in this region have known the
phenomenon for hundreds of years. In fact, this is the
time of year they traditionally set aside to tend to
their equipment and await the return of cold water.
The residents of the region have given this
phenomenon the name of El Ni ño,which is Spanish for
"the child," because it occurs at about the time of the
celebration of birth of the Christ child.
3. The word "exceptionally "，in the passage is closest in
meaningto
A.obviously
Bunusually
C.relatively
Doccasionally
4. Paragraph 3 supports which of the following
statements about El Ni ños, as that term is now used?
A.El Nifios can originate in areas other than the
Pacific Ocean.
B.El Nifios can arise when warm currents last for two
monthsorless.
C.El Nifios affect water temperatures long
distances from the South American coast.
DMultiple El Niflos can arise within a single
calendar year.
5. The phrase "is usually accompanied by ”in the
passage is closest in meaning to
A.usuallydevelopsbefore
B.usuallyoccurstogetherwith
C.isusuallyindicatedby
D.isusuallycausedby7. The word "jointly " in the passage is closest in
meaningto
A.together
B.therefore
C.rightfully
Dsimply
6. According to paragraph 4, what did Sir Gilbert
Walker discover?
A.There is a close link between El Nifio and the
Southern Oscillation.
B.Surface pressure readings all across the Pacific
first rise and then fall before an El Nifio occurs.
c Surface pressure on one side of the Pacific
tends to fall when pressure rises on the opposite side.
D.The formation of an El Nirto depends onconditions all across the Pacific, not just in the waters
off of South America.
While the warm-water countercurrent usually
lasts for two months or less, there are occasions when
the disruption to the normal flow lasts for many
months. In these situations, water temperatures are
raised not just along the coast, but for thousands of
kilometers offshore. Over the last few decades, the
term El Ni ño has come to be used to describe theseexceptionally strong episodes and not the annual
event. During the past 60 years, at least ten El Ni ños
have been observed. Not only do El Ni ño affect the
temperature of the equatorial Pacific, but the
strongest of them impact global weather.
The processes that interact to produce an El
Niño involve conditions all across the Pacific, not just
in the waters off South America. Over 60 years ago, Sir
Gilbert Walker, a British scientist, discovered a
connection between surface pressure readings at
weather stations on the eastern and western sides of
the Pacific. He noted that a rise in atmosphericpressure in the eastern Pacific is usually accompanied
bya fall in pressure in the western Pacific and vice
versa. He called this seesaw pattern the Southern
Oscillation. It was later realized that there is a close
link between El Ni ño and the Southern Oscillation. In
Fact, the link between the two is so great that they areoften referred to jointly as ENSO (El Ni ño -Southern
Oscillation).
7. According to paragraph 5, what is the end result of
the east-to-west pressure gradient in the eastern
Pacific during a typical year?
A.The formation of a thick, warm layer of water in
the western Pacific
B.The reversal of the pressure gradient to
west-to-east by the end of the year
C.A change in the direction of the Southern
Oscillation
D.The eastward flow of warm water from the
western Pacific
8. What can be inferred about El Ni ños from the
historical evidence mentioned in paragraph 6?
A.They have often brought damaging weather to
parts of the United States.
B.They have been occurring since at least the
fifteenth century.
C.They occurred less frequently in the sixteenth
century than in the fifteenth.
D.They have had stronger weather effects on the
United States in recent decades than on other
locations.
During a typical year, the eastern Pacific has a higher
pressure than the western Pacific does. This
east-to-west pressure gradient enhances the trade
winds over the equatorial waters. This results in a
warm surface current that moves east to west at the
equator. The western Pacific develops a thick, warm
layer of water while the eastern Pacific has the cold
Humboldt Current enhanced by upwelling. However,
in other years the Southern Oscillation, for unknown
reasons, swings in the opposite direction, dramatically
changing the usual conditions described above, with
pressure increasing in the western Pacific and
decreasing in the eastern Pacific. This change in the
pressure gradient causes the trade winds to weaken or,
in some cases, to reverse. This then causes the warm
water in the western Pacific to flow eastward,
increasing sea-surface temperatures in the central and
eastern Pacific. The eastward shift signals the
beginning of an El Ni ño.
603Scientists try to document as many past El Ni ño
events as possible by piecing together bits of historical
evidence, such as sea-surface temperature records,
daily observations of atmospheric pressure and
rainfall, fisheries 'records from South America, and the
writings of Spanish colonists dating back to the
fifteenth century. From such historical evidence we
know that El Ni ños have occurred as far back as
records go. It would seem that they are becoming
more frequent. Records indicate that during the
sixteenth century, an El Ni ño occurred on average
every six years. Evidence gathered over the past few
decades indicates that El Ni ños are now occurring on
average a little over every two years. Even more
alarming is the fact that they appear to be getting
stronger. The 1997-1998 El Ni ño brought copious
and damaging rainfall to the southern United States,from California to Florida. Snowstorms in the
northeast portion of the United States were more
frequent and intense than in most years.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
There is clear support for this view in the available documents.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
As it is currently used, the term El Nirio refers to a strong and lengthy disruption to the normal pattern of
ocean currents, water temperatures, and winds in the Pacific.
Answer Choices
A.An El Ni ño typically begins when the Humboldt Current causes upwelling as it travels toward the equator
along the coast of Peru and Ecuador.
B.El Nirlos are preceded by the reversal of the usual east-to- west pressure gradient in the Pacific, the
weakening or reversal of the trade winds, and the movement of warm water eastward.
C.Comparisons of historical records with recent past events show that El Ni ños are becoming more frequent
and stronger.
D.In an El Ni ño, warm surface currents replace the Humboldt Current for many months, raising ocean
temperatures far from the coast.
E.Scientists discovered the Southern Oscillation by taking surface-pressure readings at weather stations on
both sides of the Pacific.
F.In recent decades,El Nifios have begun to occur north of the equator and thereby affect weather conditions
in the United States.
TPO44
TPO44-1 From Fish to Terrestrial Vertebrates
1. Paragraph 1 supports which of the following
statements about fish evolution?
A. Lobe-finned fish were among the earliest types
of fish to appear.
B. Fish began living in freshwater habitats only
after originating elsewhere.
C. Lobe-finned fish radiated into almost all
available aquatic habitats.
D. During the Devonian, lobe-finned fish were
more common in marine than in freshwater habitats.
2.
In◆paragraph 2, why does the author include the inf
ormation that mud inside rhipidistian crossopterygian
fossils differed in consistency and texture depending
on where the mud was located?
A.To provide evidence that rhipidistian crossopterygia
n lived in river channels and lakeson large deltas.
B.To identify an effect of the oxidation of iron mineral
s on the evolution of rhipidistian crossopterygian.
C.To help explain why scientists have concluded that r
hipidistian crossopterygian probably had lungs
D.To explain why scientists decided to cut cross s
ections through some fossils of rhipidistian crossopter
ygian.
One of the most significant evolutionary events
that occurred on Earth was the transition of
water-dwelling fish to terrestrial tetrapods
(four-limbed organisms with backbones). Fish
probably originated in the oceans, and our first
records of them are in marine rocks. However, by the
Devonian Period (408 million to 362 million years ago),
they had radiated into almost all available aquatic
habitats, including freshwater settings. One of the
groups whose fossils are especially common in rocks
deposited in fresh water is the lobe-finned fish.
The freshwater Devonian lobe-finned fish
rhipidistian crossopterygian is of particular interest to
biologists studying tetrapod evolution. These fish lived
in river channels and lakes on large deltas. The delta
rocks in which these fossils are found are commonly
red due to oxidized iron minerals, indicating that the
deltas formed in a climate that had alternate wet and
dry periods. If there were periods of drought, any
adaptations allowing the fish to survive the dryconditions would have been advantageous . In these
rhipidistians ，several such adaptations existed. It is
known that they had lungs as well as gills for breathing.
Cross sections cut through some of the fossils reveal
that the mud filling the interior of the carcass differed
in consistency and texture depending on its location
inside the fish. These differences suggest a sadlike
cavity below the front end of the gut that can only be
606interpreted as a lung. Gills were undoubtedly the main
source of oxygen for these fish, but the lungs served
as an auxiliary breathing device for gulping air when
the water became oxygen depleted, such as during
extended periods of drought. So, these fish had
already evolved one of the prime requisites for living
on land: the ability to use obtain oxygen, they used
their lungs to obtain oxygen from the air when there
was not enough in the water.
3. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. Because the lungs of these fish were able to
provide only a small amount of oxygen, these fish
obtained most of their oxygen through their gills
during periods of drought.
B. During periods of extended drought, these fish
used their lungs to increase their intake of oxygen
beyond the levels absorbed by the gills in normal
times.
C. Although these fish primarily used their gills to
air as a source of oxygen.they used their lungs to
obtain oxygen from the air when there was not
enough in the water.
D. During periods of extended drought, the gills
became an auxiliary breathing device and the lungs
became the main source of oxygen for these fish.
4. According to paragraph 3, the structure of the fins
of rhipidistian crossopterygian may have allowed
these fish to
A. reduce the amount of oxygen needed for
survival
B. develop thick, sturdy bones
C. move more efficiently in water
D. move short distances over areas that were
mostly dry
A second adaptation of these fish was in the
structure of the lobe fins. The fins were thick, fleshy,
and quite sturdy, with a median axis of bone down the
center. They could have been used as feeble
locomotor devices on land, perhaps good enough to
allow a fish to flop its way from one pool of water that
was almost dry to an adjacent pond that had enough
water and oxygen for survival. These fins eventually
changed into short, stubby legs. The bones of the fins
of a Devonian rhipidistian exactly match in number
and position the limb bones of the earliest known
tetrapods, the amphibians. It should be emphasized
that the evolution of lungs and limbs was in no sense
an anticipation of future life on land. These
adaptations developed because they helped fish to
survive in their existing aquatic environment.
5. The word “progressively ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to:
A. increasingly
B. noticeably
C. occasionally
D. Rapidly
6. In paragraph 4, why does the author point out
that crabs and other arthropods were already living on
land when the ancestors of the first tetrapods began
living there?
A. To account for the presence of dead fish along
the edges of ponds and streams during the Devonian.
B. To support the claim that climate change
caused freshwater habitats to become more restricted
during the Devonian.
C. To identify a consequence of the emergence of
plants into terrestrial habitats near ponds and
streams.
D. To identify a possible reason for why certain
fish gradually became terrestrial organisms.
7. According to paragraph 5, which of the
following was true of the first tetrapods?
A. They became dependent for food on
organisms already living on land.
B. They needed to develop new mechanisms for
obtaining nutrients.
C. They continued to live in close association with
aquatic environments.
D. They were evolutionarily far removed from
their rhipidistian ancestors.
What ecological pressures might have caused
fishes to gradually abandon their watery habitat and
become increasingly land-dwelling creatures? Changes
in climate during the Devonian may have had
something to do with this if freshwater areas becameprogressively more restricted. Another impetus may
have been new sources of food. The edges of ponds
and streams surely had scattered dead fish and other
water-dwelling creatures. In addition, plants had
emerged into terrestrial habitats in areas near streams
and ponds, and crabs and other arthropods were also
members of this earliest terrestrial community. Thus,
by the Devonian the land habitat marginal to
freshwater was probably a rich source of protein that
could be exploited by an animal that could easily climb
out of water. Evidence from teeth suggests that
these earliest tetrapods did not utilize land plants as
food; they were presumably carnivorous and had not
developed the ability to feed on plants. 
How did the first tetrapods make the transition to
a terrestrial habitat? Like early land plants such as
rhyniophytes, they made only a partial transition; they
were still quite tied to water. However, many problems
that faced early land plants were not applicable to the
first tetrapods. The ancestors of these animals already
had a circulation system, and they were mobile, so
that they could move to water to drink. Furthermore,
they already had lungs, which rhipidistians
presumably used for auxiliary breathing. The principal
changes for the earliest tetrapods were in the skeletal
system—changes in the bones of the fins, the
vertebral column, pelvic girdle, and pectoral girdle.
8. According to paragraph 5, what was the main way
that the earliest tetrapods differed from their
immediate fish ancestors?
A. The tetrapods had a different skeletal
structure.
B. The tetrapods had more sources of food
available
C. The tetrapods had a circulation system.
D. The tetrapods could move to new pools of
water.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
These would have been deposited by the receding waters of droughts, during which many aquatic animals
must have died.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2points.
Freshwater lobe-finned fish may be the direct ancestors of terrestrial tetrapods.
Answer Choices
A. Rhipidistian crossopterygian had features such as primitive lungs and thick fins that could have helped it
survive dry periods.
B. During the Devonian, the number of bones increased in the fins of rtiipidistians, improving such animals '
ability to swim and move over land
C. Shortly after the earliest tetrapods developed lungs, plants and other animals began to flourish on land.
D. By the Devonian period, lobe-finned fish preferred freshwater habitats to life in the ocean.
E. A drier climate and new sources of food on land may have encouraged the lobe-finned fish 's move to a
terrestrial existence.
F. Early tetrapods remained closely connected to water, but several of their body structures were adapted for
life on land.
TPO44-2 The Use of the Camera Obscura
1. What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about
Giovanni Battista Della Porta's contribution to the
camera obscura?
A. He translated a Chinese description of the use
of the camera obscura and made the technique
available to artists.
B. His convex lens made the projected image
easier to trace.
C. His version of the camera obscura allowed for
the later addition of a mirror.
D. His improvements relied heavily on design
changes proposed earlier by Leonardo da Vinci.
2.The word "projected" in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.whole
B.corrected
C.enlarged
D.shown
The precursor of the modern camera, the camera
obscura is a darkened enclosure into which light is
admitted through a lens in a small hole. The image of
the illuminated area outside the enclosure is thrown
upside down as if by magic onto a surface in the
darkened enclosure. This technique was known as
long ago as the fifth century B.C. in China. Aristotle
also experimented with it in the fourth century B.C.,
and Leonardo da Vinci described it in his notebooks in
In 1558 Giovanni Battista Della Porta wrote in
his twenty-volume work Magia naturalis (meaning
"natural magic") instructions for adding a convex lens
to improve the quality of the image thrown against a
canvas or panel in the darkened area where its
outlines could be traced. Later, portable camera
obscuras were developed, with interior mirrors and
drawing tables on which the artist could trace the
image.
For the artist, this technique allows forms
and linear perspective to be drawn precisely as they
would be seen from a single viewpoint. Mirrors werealso used to reverse the projected images to their
original positions. 
3. Paragraph 2 answers which of the following
questions about paintings by Vermeer?
A. What characteristics of Vermeer 's paintings
suggest that he may have used a camera obscura?
B. Why did Vermeer produce only about 30
paintings?
C. Do Vermeer's paintings in general suggest that
he was unable to paint accurately without using a
camera obscura?
D. Why did Vermeer need to draw an image on
the canvas of the painting that was X-rayed if he was
using a camera obscura?
4. Which of the sentences below best expresses
the essential information in the highlighted sentence
in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning
in important ways or leave out essential information.
A. One artist with a particularly interesting point
of view about the use of the camera obscura in
painting was Jan Vermeer, who lived in the
Netherlands from 1632 to 1675.
B. Historical analyses suggest that Dutch masters
were interested in the science of optics, so they may
have used the camera obscura to trace images.
C. The use of the camera obscura is being
analyzed in the paintings of Jan Vermeer, who lived in
the Netherlands when art and science were
flourishing there.
D. One view held by historians is that most Dutch
masters were as interested in art as they were in
science, and that provides clues about the techniques
used in their paintings.
5. What does paragraph 2 indicate about
Vermeer's
The Art of Painting ?
A. It is the first in a series of about 30 paintings
that he created.
B. It may have been painted by one of his
students.
C. it was in his possession until his death in 1675.
D. It has the same setting as several other works
of his.
Did some of the great masters of painting, then,
trace their images using a camera obscura? Some art
historians are now looking for clues of artists' use of
such devices. One of the artists whose paintings are
being analyzed from this point of view is the great
Dutch master, Jan Vermeer, who lived from 1632 to
1675 during the flowering of art and science in the
Netherlands, including the science of optics. Vermeer
produced only about 30 known paintings, including his
famous The Art of Painting. The room shown in it
closely resembles the room in other Vermeer
paintings, with lighting coming from a window on the
left, the same roof beams, and similar floor tiles,
suggesting that the room was fitted with a camera
obscura on the side in the foreground. The map hung
on the opposite wall was a real map in Vermeerspossession, reproduced in such faithful detail that
some kind of tracery is suspected. When one of
Vermeer's paintings was X-rayed, it did not have any
preliminary sketches on the canvas beneath the paint,
but rather the complete image drawn in black and
white without any trial sketches. Vermeer did not have
any students, did not keep any records, and did not
encourage anyone to visit his studio, facts that can be
interpreted as protecting his secret use of a camera
obscura.
6. The word "faithful " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
B. extensive
C. exact
D. Historical
7. According to paragraph 3, Hockney believes
that all of the following indicate use of a camera
obscura EXCEPT
A. very detailed, realistic work
B. increased contrast between light and dark
C. oversimplification of forms when the image is
traced
D. complicated foreshortening of objects8. The word "intricate ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. surprising
B. complex
C. beautiful
D. clear
In recent times the British artist David Hockney
has published his investigations into the secret use of
the camera obscura, claiming that for up to 400 years,
many of Western art 's great masters probably used
the device to produce almost photographically
realistic details in their paintings. He includes in this
group Caravaggio, Hans Holbein, Leonardo da Vinci,
Diego Velazquez, Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres,
Agnolo Bronzino, and Jan van Eyck. From an artist' s
point of view, Hockney observed that a camera
obscura compresses the complicated forms of a
three-dimensional scene into two-dimensional shapes
that can easily be traced and also increases the
contrast between light and dark, leading to the
chiaroscuro effect seen in many of these paintings. In
Jan van Eyck 's
The Marriage of Giovanni Arnolfini and
Giovanna Cenami, the complicated foreshortening inthe chandelier and the intricate detail in the bride 's
garments are among the clues that Hockney thinks
point to the use of the camera obscura.
So what are we to conclude? If these artists did
use a camera obscura, does that diminish their stature?
Hockney argues that the camera obscura does not
replace artistic skill in drawing and painting. In
experimenting with it, he found that it is actually quite
difficult to use for drawing, and he speculates that the
artists probably combined their observations from life
with tracing of shapes.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
All these developments helped artists to create accurate images of objects, people, and scenes.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2points.
The camera obscura is a darkened enclosure into which light is admitted through a lens in a small hole
Answer Choices
A. Evidence that the use of the camera obscura has long been known is provided by its description in many
sources, including works dating back to Chinese writers from the fifth century B.C.
B. Some historians who have studied paintings by Western masters have found clues indicating that the
masters may have secretly used the camera obscura in their works.
C. It is now widely believed that the use of the camera obscura led to the development of a style of
photographic realism in Western art.
D. The camera obscura was most widely used by artists in Seventeenth-century Netherlands, a period when
art and science thrived
E. The unique features of Vermeer 's
The Art of Painting make it unlikely that it was made with a camera
obscura, as opposed to his other works.
F. The artist David Hockney has speculated that artists probably combined the use of the camera A with their
own original observations from life.
TPO44-3 Seagrasses
1. According to paragraph 1, which of the
following is true about seagrasses in calm ocean
waters? A. They will not survive for very long without
the nutrients brought In by fast-moving waters.
A.They will not survive for very long without the
nutrients brought In by fast-moving waters.
B. They tend to form beds covering large areas
along the ocean floor.
C. They usually are arranged in separate mounds.
D. They grow more slowly than do seagrasses in
fast-moving waters.
2. According to paragraph 1, which of the
following is MOST likely to describe a bed in which
seagrasses reach the surface of the water?
A. The water is almost completely still.
B. The bed often has major damage from strong
waves or currents.
C. The bed is generally no more than one square
meter in size.
D. Grasses form a mosaic of individual mounds.
Many areas of the shallow sea bottom are
covered with a lush growth of aquatic flowering plants
adapted to live submerged in seawater. These plants
are collectively called seagrasses. Seagrass beds are
strongly influenced by several physical factors. The
most significant is water motion: currents and waves.
Since seagrass systems exist in both sheltered and
relatively open areas, they are subject to differing
amounts of water motion. For any given seagrass
system, however, the water motion is relatively
constant. Seagrass meadows in relatively turbulent
waters tend to form a mosaic of individual mounds,
whereas meadows in relatively calm waters tend to
form flat, extensive carpets. The seagrass beds, in turn,
dampen wave action, particularly if the blades reach
the water surface. This damping effect can be
significant to the point where just one meter into a
seagrass bed the wave motion can be reduced to zero.
Currents are also slowed as they move into the bed.
3. According to paragraph 3, which of the
following does NOT accurately describe the sediments
that collect in seagrass beds?
A. Fine-grained
B. Only a few millimeters deep
C. Low in oxygen
D. Rich in organic matter
4. According to paragraph 3, how do seagrasses
affect the nutrient supply in the ecosystem?
A. Because of their high rate of metabolism, they
consume a large percentage of the available nutrients.
B. They attract various species of algae and
bacteria that produce high nutrient concentrations in
the water column.
C. They take up carbon and other nutrients
trapped on the sea bottom and bring them back into
use.
D. Through anaerobic processes at their roots,
they produce a very nutrient-rich sediment.
The slowing of wave action and currents means that
seagrass beds tend to accumulate sediment. However,
this is not universal and depends on the currents
under which the bed exists. Seagrass beds under the
influence of strong currents tend to have many of the
lighter particles, including seagrass debris, moved out,
whereas beds in weak current areas accumulate
lighter detrital material. It is interesting that
temperate seagrass beds accumulate sediments from
sources outside the beds, whereas tropical seagrass
beds derive most of their sediments from within.
Since most seagrass systems are depositional
environments, they eventually accumulate organic
material that leads to the creation of fine-grained
sediments with a much higher organic content than
that of the surrounding unvegetated areas. This
accumulation, in turn, reduces the water movement
and the oxygen supply. The high rate of metabolism
(the processing of energy for survival) of the
microorganisms in the sediments causes sediments to
be anaerobic (without oxygen) below the first few
millimeters. According to ecologist J. W. Kenworthy,
anaerobic processes of the microorganisms in the
sediment are an important mechanism for
regenerating and recycling nutrients and carbon,
ensuring the high rates of productivity —that is, the
amount of organic material produced-that are
measured in those beds. In contrast to otherproductivity in the ocean, which is confined to various
species of algae and bacteria dependent on nutrient
concentrations in the water column, seagrasses are
rooted plants that absorb nutrients from the sediment
or substrate. They are, therefore, capable of recycling
nutrients into the ecosystem that would otherwise be
trapped in the bottom and rendered unavailable.
5. It can be inferred from paragraph 4 that the
reason seagrasses do not grow in very deep water is
that
A. they cannot handle intense water pressure
B. deep water is too cold
C. they would not get enough light
D. deep water is too salty
6.In paragraph 4, why does the author mention
that eelgrass thrives in both the Arctic and in the
northeastern United States?
A..
To show that environments with extreme
temperatures rarely have any effect on eelgrass
B.To identify the northern and southern limits of
the range where eelgrass is found
C.To support the author's statement that eelgrass
is a particularly widespread kind of seagrass
D. To cite evidence tending to disprove one view
about the importance of temperature to the growth of
eelgrass7.The word “detrimental ”in the passage is
closest in meaning to
A. harmful.
B. Significant
C. Unexpected
D. distinct
8. Paragraph 4 suggests that which of the
following would be the LEAST likely to cause major
damage to eelgrass and other common seagrasses?
A. Factors related to extreme temperatures
B. Exposure to air
C. Major changes in salinity
D. The movement of ice on the seafloor
Other physical factors that have an effect on seagrass
beds include light, temperature, and desiccation
(drying out). For example, water depth and turbidity
(density of particles in the water) together or
separately control the amount of light available to the
plants and the depth to which the seagrasses may
extend. Although marine botanist W. A. Setchell
suggested early on that temperature was critical to
the growth and reproduction of seagrass, it has since
been shown that this particularly widespread seagrass
grows and reproduces at temperatures between 2 and
4 degrees Celsius in the Arctic and at temperatures up
to 28 degrees Celsius on the northeastern coast of the
United States. Still, extreme temperatures, in
combination with other factors, may have dramaticdetrimental effects. For example, in areas of the cold
North Atlantic, ice may form in winter. Researchers
Robertson and Mann note that when the ice begins to
break up, the wind and tides may move the ice around,
scouring the bottom and uprooting the eelgrass. In
contrast, at the southern end of the eelgrass range, on
the southeastern coast of the United States,
temperatures over 30 degrees Celsius in summer
cause excessive mortality. Seagrass beds also decline if
they are subjected to too much exposure to the air.
The effect of desiccation is often difficult to separate
from the effect of temperature. Most seagrass beds
seem tolerant of considerable changes in salinity (salt
levels) and can be found in brackish (somewhat salty)
waters as well as in full- strength seawater.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Seagrasses grow together in dense patches, or beds, with as many as 4,000 blades per square meter.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2points.
Seagrasses are aquatic flowering plants that grow in either sheltered or open areas of the sea
Answer Choices
A. Seagrass beds are influenced by several physical factors, the most significant being the stability of the sea
bottom, which must anchor them against the currents.
B. Because they slow currents and waves, seagrass beds collect deposits of rich organic sediments, which are
home to many anaerobic microorganisms.
C. Unlike sea organisms that depend on the water column for their productivity, seagrasses ensure high rates
of productivity by taking nutrients from ocean floor sediment.
D. Sediments in seagrass beds vary by region, with temperate beds accumulating sediments from within, and
tropical beds collecting sediments from without.
E. Seagrasses under weak currents tend to have higher rates of metabolism than those under strong currents,
perhaps because of differences in oxygen levels.
F. Although seagrasses survive in temperatures ranging from 2 to 28 degrees Celsius, more extreme
temperatures can damage them, as can desiccation and lack of light.
TPO45
TPO45-1 Microscopes The Beringia Landscape
1. The word "remnants " in the passage is closest in
meaning
A.remains
B.evidence
C.results
D.reminders
During the peak of the last ice age, northeast Asia
(Siberia) and Alaska were connected by a broad land
mass called the Bering Land Bridge. This land bridge
existed because so much of Earth 's water was frozen
in the great ice sheets that sea levels were over 100
meters lower than they are today. Between 25,000
and 10,000 years ago, Siberia, the Bering Land Bndge,
and Alaska shared many environmental characteristics.
These included a common mammalian fauna of large
mammals, a common flora composed of broad
grasslands as well as wind-swept dunes and tundra,
and a common climate with cold, dry winters and
somewhat warmer summers. The recognition that
many aspects of the modem flora and fauna werepresent on both sides of the Bering Sea as remnants of
the ice-age landscape led to this region being named
Beringia.
It is through Beringia that small groups of large
mammal hunters, slowly expanding their hunting
territories, eventually colonized North and South
America. On this archaeologists generally agree, but
that is where the agreement stops. One broad area of
2. According to paragraph 3, all of the following are
true of the Beringian landscape EXCEPT.
A.There was little vegetation.
B.The mammal species there all survived into modern
versions.
C.The climate was drier than it is today.
D.There were mountains with glaciers.
3. The purpose of paragraph 3 is to
A.contrast today 's Beringian landscape with other
landscapes in the American continent
B.describe the Beringian landscape during the last ice
age
C.explain why so many Beringian species became
extinct during the last ice age
D.summarize the information about Beringia that
historians agree on
4. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.According to biologist Dale Guthrie, mammal
species require broad areas of vegetation to survive.
B.Dale Guthrie is an Arctic biologist who argued that
broad areas of dense vegetation were surely enough
to attract mammals such as mammoth, horse, and
bison to Beringia.
C.Dale Guthrie argued that Beringia, though cold and
dry, must have had enough dense vegetation to
support the herds of mammoth, horse, and bison that
lived there.
D.As long as Beringia was cold and dry, argued Dale
Guthrie, dense vegetation grew in order to support
the herds of mammoth, horse, and bison —the
mammal species present there.disagreement in explaining the peopling of the
Americas is the domain of paleoecologists, but it is
critical to understanding human history: what was
Beringia like?
The Beringian landscape was very different from
what it is The Beringian landscape was very different
from what it is today. Broad, windswept valleys;
glaciated mountains; sparse vegetation; and less
moisture created a rather forbidding land mass. This
land mass supported herds of now-extinct species of
mammoth, bison, and horse and somewhat modern
versions of caribou, musk ox, elk, and saiga antelope.
These grazers supported in turn a number of
impressive carnivores, including the giant short-faced
bear, the saber-tooth cat, and a large species of lion. The presence of mammal species that require
grassland vegetation has led Arctic biologist Dale
Guthrie to argue that while cold and dry, there must
have been broad areas of dense vegetation to support
herds of mammoth, horse, and bison. Further, nearly
all of the ice-age fauna had teeth that indicate an
adaptation to grasses and sedges; they could not have
been supported by a modern flora of mosses and
lichens. Guthrie has also demonstrated that the
landscape must have been subject to intense andcontinuous winds, especially in winter. He makes this
argument based on the anatomy of horse and bison,
which do not have the ability to search for food
through deep snow cover. They need landscapes with
strong winds that remove the winter snows, exposing
the dry grasses beneath. Guthrie applied the term
“mammoth steppe" to characterize this landscape.
5.According to paragraph 4 ，Guthrie believes that the
teeth of ice-age fauna support which of the following
conclusions?
A. Large mammals would not have been able to
survive in the Beringian landscape.
B. Grasslands were part of the Beringian landscape.
C.Strong winds exposed dry grasses under the snow.
D.Horses and bison did not have the ability to search
for food through deep snow cover..
6. According to paragraph 5, how did Dale Guthrie use
the information about radiocarbon analysis of bones
from Benngian deposits?
A.To suggest that Colinvaux should have used different
methods to measure the amount of pollen in ice-age
lake sediments
B.To argue that the large Beringian mammals must
have eaten plants that produce little, if any, pollen
C.To show that the conclusions that Colinvaux drew
from the analysis of pollen in ice-age lake sediments
cannot be correct
D.To explain why so-called polar deserts are incapable
of supporting such large animals as mammoth, horse,
and bison7. The word "plausible " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.preferable
B.practical
C.reasonable
D.advantageous
8. Which of the following best describes the
organization of paragraph 6?
A.Two contrasting views are presented, and a study
that could decide between them is proposed
B.An argument is offered, and reasons both for and
against the argument are presented
C.A claim is made, and a study supporting the claim is
described
D.New information is presented, and the information
is used to show that two competing explanations can
each be seen as correct in some way.
In contrast, Paul Colinvaux has offered a
counterargument based on the analysis of pollen in
lake sediments dating to the last ice age. He found
that the amount of pollen recovered in these
sediments is so low that the Beringian landscape
during the peak of the last glaciation was more likely
to have been what he termed a "polar desert," with
little or only sparse vegetation, in no way was it
possible that this region could have supported large
herds of mammals and thus, human hunters. Guthrie
has argued against this view by pointing out that
radiocarbon analysis of mammoth, horse, and bison
bones from Beringian deposits revealed that the
bones date to the period of most intense glaciation.
The argument seemed to be at a standstill until a
number of recent studies resulted in a spectacular
suite of new finds. The first was the discovery of a
1,000-square-kilometer preserved patch of Beringian
vegetation dating to just over 17,000 years ago —the
peak of the last ice age The plants were preserved
under a thick ash fall from a volcanic eruption.
Investigations of the plants found grasses, sedges,
mosses, and many other varieties in a nearly
continuous cover, as was predicted by Guthrie. But
this vegetation had a thin root mat with no soil
formation, demonstrating that there was little
long-term stability in plant cover, a finding supporting
some of the arguments of Colinvaux. A mixture of
continuous but thin vegetation supporting herds of
large mammals is one that seems plausible and
realistic with the available data.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Nevertheless, large animals managed to survive in Beringia.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
During the last ice age, human hunters pursued large mammals across Beringia, a land whose climatic
characteristics have been in dispute.
Answer Choices
A.Strong evidence indicates that large mammals like mammoth and bison survived in the harsh ice-age
Beringian landscape.
B.Carnivores such as the saber-tooth cat were primarily responsible for the disappearance of the largest of
the grazing animals, but the harsh winters caused some grazers to die of starvation.
C.The discovery that grasses, sedges, and mosses survived under the thick ash from a large volcanic eruption
proved that the ice-age Benngian plant cover was extremely resistant to climatic extremes.
D.Benngian mammals crossed easily from northeastern Asia to Alaska across the Bering Land Bridge, though
there are indications that they usually went back to Asia for the brief, but warm, summers.
E.Analyses of ice-age sediments uncovered very small amounts of pollen, suggesting that Benngia lacked the
quantity of vegetation needed to support large herds of mammals.
F.Recent discoveries suggest that shallow-rooted plants created a fairly continuous cover over ice-age
Beringia, though the cover most likely was variable and uncertain in any one location.
TPO45-2 Wind pollination
1. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 1 about pollen production?
A.Pollen production requires a significant investment
of energy and resources on the part of the plant.
B.The capacity to produce pollen in large quantities is
a recent development in the evolutionary history of
plants.
C.Plants in the tropics generally produce more pollen
than those in temperate zones.
D.The highest levels of pollen production are found in
plants that depend on insects or birds to carry their
pollen.
2. According to paragraph 1, wind-pollinated trees are
most likely to be found
Ain temperate forests
B.at lower latitudes
C.in the tropics
D.surrounded by trees of many different species
3. Paragraph 1 supports which of the following as the
reason animals are a safer bet than wind as pollinators
when the individual trees of a species are widely
separated?
A.Animals tend to carry pollen from a given flower
further than the wind does.
B.Animals serve as pollinators even where there is
little wind to disperse the pollen.
C.An animal that visits a flower is likely to deliberately
visit other flowers of the same species and pollinate
them.
D.Birds and insects fly in all directions, not just the
direction the wind is blowing at a given moment.
Pollen, a powdery substance, which is produced
by flowering plants and contains male reproductive
cells, is usually carried from plant to plant by insects
or birds, but some plants rely on the wind to carry
their pollen. Wind pollination is often seen as being
primitive and wasteful in costly pollen and yet it is
surprisingly common, especially in higher latitudes.
Wind is very good at moving pollen a long way; pollen
can be blown for hundreds of kilometers, and only
birds can get pollen anywhere near as far. Thedrawback is that wind is obviously unspecific as to
where it takes the pollen. It is like trying to get a letter
to a friend at the other end of the village by climbing
onto the roof and throwing an armful of letters into
the air and hoping that one will end up in the friend's
garden. For the relatively few dominant tree species
that make up temperate forests, where there are
many individuals of the same species within pollen
range, this is quite a safe gamble. If a number of
people in the village were throwing letters off roofs,
your friend would be bound to get one. By contrast, in
the tropics, where each tree species has few, widely
scattered individuals, the chance of wind blowing
pollen to another individual is sufficiently slim that
animals are a safer bet as transporters of pollen. Even
tall trees in the tropics are usually not wind pollinated
despite being in windy conditions. In a similar way,
trees in temperate forests that are insect pollinated
tend to grow as solitary, widely spread individuals.
4. In paragraph 1, the author compares pollen moved
by wind with letters thrown off roofs in order to
A.explain why there are relatively few species of trees
that depend on wind pollination
B.compare natural, biological processes with human
social practices
C.make a point about the probability of wind-blown
pollen reaching a tree of the same species
D.argue against the common assumption that the
tallest trees are the most likely to employ wind
pollination5. The word "respectively ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.over time
B.separately
Cin that order
D.consistently
6. According to paragraph 3, why do most deciduous
wind-pollinated trees produce their pollen in the
spring?
A.To avoid competing with evergreen conifers, which
flower in the fall or winter
B.So that the leaves of the trees receiving the pollen
will not prevent the pollen from reaching the trees'
stigmas
C.Because they do not have enough energy to produce
new leaves and pollen at the same time
D.In order to take advantage of the windiest time of
year
Since wind-pollinated flowers have no need to
attract insects or other animals, they have dispensed
with bright petals, nectar, and scent. These are at best
a waste and at worst an impediment to the transfer of
pollen in the air. The result is insignificant-looking
flowers and catkins (dense cylindrical clusters of small,
petalless flowers).
Wind pollination does, of course, require a lot of
pollen.
Birch and hazel trees can produce 5.5 and 4million grains per catkin, respectively .
There are
various adaptations to help as much of the pollen go
as far as possible. Most deciduous wind-pollinated
trees (which shed their leaves every fall) produce their
pollen in the spring while the branches are bare of
leaves to reduce the surrounding surfaces that
“compete" with the stigmas (the part of the flower
that receives the pollen) for pollen. Evergreen
conifers, which do not shed their leaves, have less to
gain from spring flowering, and, indeed, some flower
in the autumn or winter.
7. According to paragraph 4 ，which of the following is
NOT an adaptation that helps ensure that pollen
travels as far as possible?
A.Pollen-producing flowers and catkins are located at
or near the top of the tree.
B.Trees grow at least 100 meters away from each
other.
C.Dangling catkins release pollen only when the wind
is blowing hard.
D.Pollen is not released during rain storms or when
the air is damp.
8. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Because smaller particles tend to stay trapped in the
fast moving air, they are blown much farther than
other grains.
B.Smaller particles are trapped by the stigma when
fast-moving air flows past it.
C.Small particles that are whisked past the waiting
stigma gain speed and are often trapped in the
fast-moving air.
D.While smallness helps pollen travel farther, it also
makes it more likely to be blown past the stigma.
Pollen produced higher in the top branches is
likely to go farther: it is windier (and gustier) and the
pollen can be blown farther before hitting the ground.
Moreover, dangling catkins like hazel hold the pollen
in until the wind is strong enough to bend them,
ensuring that pollen is only shed into the air when the
wind is blowing hard. Weather is also important.
Pollen is shed primarily when the air is dry to prevent
too much sticking to wet surfaces or being knocked
out of the air by rain. Despite these adaptations, much
of the pollen fails to leave the top branches, and only
between 0.5 percent and 40 percent gets more than
100 meters away from the parent. But once this far,significant quantities can go a kilometer or more.
Indeed, pollen can travel many thousands of
kilometers at high altitudes. Since all this pollen isfloating around in the air, it is no wonder that
wind-pollinated trees are a major source of allergies.
Once the pollen has been snatched by the wind,
the fate of the pollen is obviously up to the vagaries of
the wind, but not everything is left to chance.
Windborne pollen is dry, rounded, smooth, and
generally smaller than that of insect-pollinated plants.
But size is a two-edged sword. Small grains may be
blown farther but they are also more prone to be
whisked past the waiting stigma because smaller
particles tend to stay trapped in the fast-moving air
that flows around the stigma. But stigmas create
turbulence, which slows the air speed around them
and may help pollen stick to them.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
This level of volume is important to ensure that at least some of the pollen reaches target tree, but
dispersing the pollen is crucial as well.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Some plants depend on the wind to carry their pollen.
Answer Choices
A.Because there are few trees in temperate forests, it is safer to transport pollen by insects or birds.
B.Wind pollination is a safe reproductive strategy for trees in temperate forests where there are only a few
dominant species and, therefore, many individuals of the same species.
C.Wind pollination requires production of a large amount of pollen, which must be released at the right time
and under the right conditions to extend its range.
D.Most wind-pollinated trees are deciduous because evergreen needles compete with the stigma for pollen,
making wind pollination uncertain.
E.Wind-pollinated plants usually have small petalless flowers which often grow in catkins that produce a very
fine-grained pollen.
F.Wind-pollinated trees must grow in regions that are only moderately windy because strong winds will blow
the tiny pollen grains past the stigma.
TPO45-3 Feeding Strategies in the Ocean
1. What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about why
energy conservation is not a high priority for ocean
animals in coastal waters during the spring?
A.Those animals are least active during the spring
B.Those animals have a plentiful supply of food
C.Those animals have to expend energy to avoid
predators.
D.Those animals store energy during the colder
seasons.
2. What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about fish?
A.Most fish feed on plankton.
B.Fish tend to avoid well-illuminated areas.
CMost fish species are not filter-feeders.
D.Few fish species are successful in the near-surface
layers.
3. According to paragraph 2, how do sardines and
anchovies obtain food near the surface of the ocean?
A.They rely on the large quantities of food
resources also available to local carnivores.
BThey capture the larvae of some crustaceans.
C.They feed on the organisms left over by
commercial fisheries.
D.They obtain algae by using their gills as filters.
In the open sea, animals can often find food reliably
available in particular regions or seasons (e g., in
coastal areas in springtime). In these circumstances,
animals are neither constrained to get the last calorie
out of their diet nor is energy conservation a high
priority. In contrast, the food levels in the deeper
layers of the ocean are greatly reduced, and the
energy constraints on the animals are much moresevere . To survive at those levels, animals must
maximize their energy input, finding and eating
whatever potential food source may be present.
In the near-surface layers, there are many large, fast
carnivores as well as an immense variety of planktonic
animals, which feed on plankton (small, free-floating
plants or animals) by filtering them from currents of
water that pass through a specialized anatomical
structure. These filter-feeders thrive in the
well-illuminated surface waters because oceans have
so many very small organisms, from bacteria to large
algae to larval crustaceans. Even fishes can become
successful filter-feeders in some circumstances.
Although the vast majority of marine fishes are
carnivores, in near-surface regions of high productivity
the concentrations of larger phytoplankton (the plant
component of plankton) are sufficient to support huge
populations of filter-feeding sardines and anchovies.
These small fishes use their gill filaments to strain out
the
algae that dominate such areas. Sardines and
anchovies provide the basis for huge commercial
fisheries as well as a food resource for large numbers
of local carnivores, particularly seabirds. At a much
larger scale, baleen whales and whale sharks are also
efficient filter-feeders in productive coastal or polar
waters, although their filtered particles comprise small
animals such as copepods and krill rather than
phytoplankton.
4.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A. An organism may obtain food particles from
seawater when currents generated by the organism
cause water to pass through its fitter
B.The nutritional content of the food particles in
seawater is sufficient to meet the energy demands of
most planktonic animals.
C. As planktonic animals require a lot of energy, they
have to generate a current strong enough to bring
them sufficient particles of food.
D.Organisms that filter seawater to meet their
nutritional needs expend a lot of energy, especially
those organisms that have to create their own
currents.
5.According to paragraph 4, deep-water filter-feeders
have adopted all of the following ways to obtain food
EXCEPT
A.developing larger filtering systems
B. capturing prey using sticky tentacles
C. swimming up to the surface at feeding time
D. searching in ocean layers that contain a substantial
amount of particles
Filtering seawater for its particulate nutritional
content can be an energetically demanding method of
feeding, particularly when the current of water to be
filtered has to be generated by the organism itself, as
is the case for all planktonic animals. Particulate
organic matter of at least 2.5 micrograms per cubic
liter is required to provide a filter-feeding planktonic
organism with a net energy gain. This value is easily
exceeded in most coastal waters, but in the deep sea,
the levels of organic matter range from next to
nothing to around 7 micrograms per cubic liter. Even
There are, therefore, fewer successful
filter-feeders in deep water, and some of those that
are there have larger filtering systems to cope with thescarcity of particles. Another solution for such animals
is to forage in particular layers of water where the
particles may be more concentrated. Many of the
groups of animals that typify the filter-feeding lifestyle
in shallow water have deep-sea representatives that
have become predatory. Their filtering systems, which
reach such a high degree of development in shallow-
water species, are greatly reduced. Alternative
methods of active or passive prey capture have been
evolved, including trapping and seizing prey,
entangling prey, and sticky tentacles.
6.Why does the author include the information that
animals in the deep ocean place an emphasis on
lures" and have evolved "elongated appendages ”?
A.To argue against the view that animals in the deep
ocean use more energy to find food than do animals in
shallow waters
B.To emphasize the importance of an am mars ability
to control a large volume of water
C.To identify some feeding strategies that animals
have developed to minimize their energy expenditure
D.To give examples of body structures that help those
animals move quickly in deep ocean waters
7. The phrase "coping with" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. Absorbing
B.finding
C. approaching
D. managing
8.According to paragraph 5, why do some fish swallow
their prey whole?
A.Their teeth are too large to allow for cutting prey.
B.They have no jaw muscles to allow chewing.
C.Swallowing prey whole results in a higher net energy
gain.
D.Chewing can cause their jaws to dislocate.
In the deeper waters of the oceans, there is a much
greater tendency for animals to await the arrival of
food particles or prey rather than to search them out
actively (thus minimizing energy expenditure). This
has resulted in a more stealthy style of feeding, with
the consequent emphasis on lures and/or the
evolution of elongated appendages that increase the
active volume of water controlled or monitored by the
animal. Another consequence of the limited
availability of prey is that many animals havedeveloped ways of coping with much larger food
particles, relative to their own body size, than the
equivalent shallower species can process. Among
the fishes there is a tendency for the teeth and jaws to
become appreciably enlarged. In such creatures, not
only are the teeth hugely enlarged and/or the jaws
elongated but the size of the mouth opening may be
greatly increased by making the jaw articulations soflexible that they can be effectively dislocated. Very
large or long teeth provide almost no room for cutting
the prey into a convenient size for swallowing, the fish
must gulp the prey down whole.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Such a passive approach requires those animals to develop specialized methods of acquiring food.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions : An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage This question is worth 2 points .
Ocean animals have developed various strategies for maximizing energy input from food.
Answer Choices
A.Large carnivores near the ocean surface feed mainly on organic matter left over after it passes through the
filters of the filter-feeders.
B.Even in deep ocean layers where prey is relatively hard to find, filter feeding is still the least
energetically-demanding method of obtaining food.
C.Animals in deeper water have evolved strategies and body structures that allow them to use as little energy
as possible in obtaining food.
D.Near the surface of the water, many animals obtain food by using specialized body parts to filter plankton
from the water.
E.Filter-feeding is more common in shallow water, where there is a higher concentration of organic matter
than there is in deeper water.
F.At deeper ocean levels plankton is relatively rare, requiring animals at those levels to actively search for
their food sources.
TPO46
TPO46-1 The Origins of Writing
1. The word “virtue”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.price
B.design
Cdesirable quality
D.physical characteristic
2. What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about clay
as a writing material?
A.It had to be baked before it could be written on
B.Its good points outweighed its bad points.
C.Its durability was its most important feature for its
users.
D.It was not available in Egypt.
It was in Egypt and Mesopotamia (modern-day
Iraq) that civilization arose, and it is there that we find
the earliest examples of that key feature of civilization,
writing. These examples, in the form of inscribed clay
tablets that date to shortly before 3000 B.C.E., have
been discovered among the archaeological remains of
the Sumerians, a gifted people settled in southern
Mesopotamia.
The Egyptians were not far behind in developing
writing, but we cannot follow the history of their
writing in detail because they used a perishable
writing material. In ancient times the banks of the Nile
were lined with papyrus plants, and from the papyrus
reeds the Egyptians made a form of paper; it was
excellent in quality but, like any paper, fragile.
Mesopotamia 's rivers boasted no such useful reeds,
but its land did provide good clay, and as a
consequence the clay tablet became the standardmaterial. Though clumsy and bulky it has a virtue dear
to archaeologists: it is durable. Fire, for example,
which is death to papyrus paper or other writing
materials such as leather and wood, simply bakes it
hard, thereby making it even more durable. So when a
conqueror set a Mesopotamian palace ablaze, hehelped ensure the survival of any clay tablets in it. Clay,
moreover, is cheap, and forming it into tablets is easy,
factors that helped the clay tablet become the
preferred writing material not only throughout
Mesopotamia but far outside it as well, in Syria, Asia
Minor, Persia, and even for a while in Crete and
Greece. Excavators have unearthed clay tablets in all
these lands. In the Near East they remained in use for
more than two and a half millennia, and in certain
areas they lasted down to the beginning of the
common era until finally yielding, once and for all, to
more conv enient alternatives.
3. In paragraph 2, why does the author discuss the
Egyptian use of papyrus as a writing material^
A.To describe the superiofity of papyrus over leattier
and wood as a writing material
B.To explain why writing in Egypt did not develop as
quickly as it did Mesopotamia
C.To explain why archaeologists' knowledge of the
early history of writing relies mainly on Sumerian
cuneiform
D.To explain why the Sumerians preferred clay tablets
for writing over papyrus
4. According to paragraph 3, all of the following are
true of cuneiform writing EXCEPT:
A.It was composed of very simple shapes
B.It was perfected by the ancient Sumerians.
C.It influenced the choice of material on which it was
written.
D.It was understood by very few Sumerians.
5. According to paragraph 4, how did the Akkadians
use the Sumerian language?
A.They used Sumerian for speaking but used their own
national language for writing.
B.They used the complex cuneiform signs developed
by the Babylonians and Assyrians rather than the
Sumerian signs.
C.They developed their own cuneiform shapes on clay
tablets to replace those used by the Sumerians.
D.They assigned new sound and word values to the
signs of Sumerian cuneiform.
6. Paragraph 4 answers all the following questions
about Sumerian writing in the period after the
Sumerians were conquered EXCEPT:
A.Did Sumerian literature continue to be read?
B.Did Sumerian continue to be spoken?
C.Did scribes compose new texts in Sumerian?
D.Did Sumerian have the same fate as Latin had after
the fall of Rome?The Sumerians perfected a style of writing suited
to clay. This script consists of simple shapes, basically
just wedge shapes and lines that could easily be
incised in soft clay with a reed or wooden stylus;
scholars have dubbed it cuneiform from the
wedge-shaped marks (cunei in Latin) that are its
hallmark Although the ingredients are merely wedges
and lines, there are hundreds of combinations of
these basic forms that stand for different sounds or
words. Learning these complex signs required long
training and much practice; inevitably, literacy was
largely limited to a small professional class, the
scribes.
The Akkadians conquered the Sumerians around
the middle of the third millennium B.C.E., and they
took over the various cuneiform signs used for writing
Sumerian and gave them sound and word values that
fit their own language. The Babylonians and
Assyrians did the same, and so did peoples in Syria
and Asia Minor. The literature of the Sumerians was
treasured throughout the Near East, and long after
Sumerian ceased to be spoken, the Babylonians and
Assyrians and others kept it alive as a literary language,
the way Europeans kept Latin alive after the fall of
Rome.
For the scribes of these non-Sumerian
languages, training was doubly demanding since they
had to know the values of the various cuneiform signs
for Sumerian as well as for their own language. 
7. According to paragraph 5, writing was first used for
A.simple bookkeeping
Bdescriptions of daily events
C.counting the contents of clay tablets
D.government reports8. The phrase “Now and then ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.always
B.occasionally
C.sooner or later
Dfirst and last
The contents of the earliest clay tablets are
simple notations of numbers of
commodities— animals, jars, baskets, etc. Writing, it
would appear, started as a primitive form of
bookkeeping. Its use soon widened to document the
multitudinous things and acts that are involved in
daily life, from simple inventories of commodities to
complicated governmental rules and regulations.
Archaeologists frequently find clay tablets in
batches. The batches, some of which contain
thousands of tablets, consist for the most part of
documents of the types just mentioned: bills,
deliveries, receipts, inventories, loans, marriage
contracts, divorce settlements, court judgments, and
so on. These records of factual matters were kept in
storage to be available for reference-they were, in
effect, files, or, to use the term preferred by specialistsin the ancient Near East, archives. Now and then these
files include pieces of writing that are of a distinctly
different order, writings that do not merely record
some matter of fact but involve creative intellectual
activity. They range from simple textbook material to
literature-and they make an appearance very early,
even from the third millennium B C E.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
However, the Sumerian language did not entirely disappear.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage
10.Directions : An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points .
The earliest examples of writing have been found in Mesopotamia and date to shortly before 3000 B.C.E.
Answer Choices
A.Writing was invented in the same areas in which civilization began by the ancient civilizations of
Mesopotamia, Asia Minor and the Mediterranean.
B.The development of cuneiform is known because it was written on a long-lasting material and because it
was long and widely used throughout the ancient Near East.
C.Cuneiform tablets generally dealt with business and factual matters, but other topics, including literature,
were also recorded and valued.
D.Writing was developed first by the Sumerians using wedge shaped marks (cuneiform) on clay tablets and
then by the Egyptians using papyrus paper.
E.Scribes using cuneiform in Assyria, Babylon, Syria and Asia Minor had to learn all the languages that used
the cuneiform script.
F.Batches of clay tablets, sometimes with as many as a thousand tablets each, are often found by
archaeologists.
TPO46-2 The Commercial Revolution in Medieval Europe
1. According to paragraph 1, one effect of the
increased use of cash was that
A.an individual merchant no longer performed all
aspects of trading operations
Ba company's home office declined in importance
C.merchants no longer had to transport their goods to
distant places
D.the volume of trade declined in areas lacking silver
mines2. The word “radically”， in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.fundamentally
B.quickly
C.unexpectedly
D.gradually
Beginning in the 1160s, the opening of new silver
mines in northern Europe led to the minting and
circulation of vast quantities of silver coins. The
widespread use of cash greatly increased the volume
of international trade. Business procedures changedradically . The individual traveling merchant who alone
handled virtually all aspects of exchange evolved into
an operation invoh/ing three separate types of
merchants: the sedentary merchant who ran the
"home office," financing and organizing the firm 's
entire export-import trade; the carriers who
transported goods by land and sea; and the company
agents resident in cities abroad who, on the advice of
the home office, looked after sales and procurements.
3. The word “oversaw " in the passage is closest In
meaning to
A.understood
B.included
Cdelivered
Dsupervised
4. According to paragraph 3, Hanseatic merchants
benefited by all of the following EXCEPT
A.the use of trading centers in distant cities
B.a new system of recording commercial transactions
C.the opening of overland trade routes across
northern Europe
Daccess to markets in about 200 cities
Commercial correspondence, unnecessary when one
businessperson oversaw everything and made direct
bargains with buyers and sellers, multiplied. Regular
courier service among commercial cities began.
Commercial accounting became more complex when
firms had to deal with shareholders, manufacturers,
customers, branch offices, employees, and competing
firms. Tolls on roads became high enough to finance
what has been called a road revolution, involving new
surfaces and bridges, new passes through the Alps,and new inns and hospices for travelers. The growth of
mutual trust among merchants facilitated the growth
of sales on credit and led to new developments in
finance, such as the bill of exchange, a device that
made the long, slow, and very dangerous shipment of
coins unnecessary.
The ventures of the German Hanseatic League
illustrate these advancements. The Hanseatic League
was a mercantile association of European towns
dating from 1159. The league grew by the end of the
fourteenth century to include about 200 cities from
Holland to Poland. Across regular, well- defined trade
routes along the Baltic and North seas, the ships of
league cities carried furs, wax, copper, fish, grain,
timber, and wine. These goods were exchanged for
finished products, mainly cloth and salt, from western
cities.
At cities such as Bruges and London, Hanseatic
merchants secured special trading concessions,
exempting them from all tolls and allowing them to
trade at local fairs. Hanseatic merchants established
foreign trading centers, the most famous of which was
the London Steelyard, a walled community with
warehouses, offices, a church, and residential quarters
for company representatives. By the late thirteenth
century, Hanseatic merchants had developed an
important business technique, the business register.
Merchants publicly recorded their debts and contracts
and received a league guarantee for them. This deviceproved a decisive factor in the later development of
credit and commerce in northern Europe.
5. Why does the author provide the information in
paragraph 4 that the commercial classes never
exceeded 10 percent of the population?
A.To argue that the wealth created by the commercial
revolution benefited only a small number of people
B.To challenge the view that the commercial classes
made up a majority of the population of Europe
C.To suggest a reason that the commercial revolution
ended around A. D. 1300
D.To emphasize the point that the commercial
revolution was brought about by a small part of the
population
6. According to paragraph 4, which of the following
was associated with the rise of modem states?
A.Increased wealth for the ruling classes
B.The weakening of the aristocracy
C.The decline of the middle class
D.A reduction in taxes7. The word "alliances " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.transactions
B.communications
C.partnerships
D.conflicts
8. Paragraph 5 supports which of the following
inferences about the commercial revolution between
ad 1000 and 1300?
A.It had very little impact on social attitudes and
values.
B.It brought about major political changes throughout
Europe.
C.It lessened the influence of the church.
DIt increased the population of small towns.
These developments added up to what one
modern scholar has called "a commercial revolution."
In the long run, the commercial revolution of the High
Middle Ages ( A D1000-1300) brought about radical
change in European society. One remarkable aspect of
this change was that the commercial classes
constituted a small part of the total
population —never more than 10 percent. They
exercised an influence far in excess of their numbers.
The commercial revolution created a great deal of new
wealth, which meant a higher standard of living. The
existence of wealth did not escape the attention of
kings and other rulers. Wealth could be taxed, and
through taxation, kings could create strong andcentralized states. In the years to come, alliances with
the middle classes were to enable kings to weaken
aristocratic interests and build the states that came to
be called modern.
The commercial revolution also provided the
opportunity for thousands of agricultural workers to
improve their social position. The slow but steady
transformation of European society from almost
completely rural and isolated to relatively more urban
constituted the greatest effect of the commercial
revolution that began in the eleventh century. Even so,
merchants and business people did not run medieval
communities, except in central and northern Italy and
in the county of Flanders. Most towns remained small.
The nobility and churchmen determined the
predominant social attitudes, values, and patterns of
thought and behavior. The commercial changes of the
eleventh through fourteenth centuries did however,
lay the economic foundation for the development of
urban life and culture.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
While It originated in the German city of Liibeck, it began to expand in 1241 when Liibeck entered into a
mutual protection treaty with the city of Hamburg.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions : An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points .
During the High Middle Ages (A.D. 1000-1300), Europe underwent a commercial revolution.
Answer Choices
A.Merchants adopted new accounting and trading procedures to make long-distance trading more efficient.
B.The faster transportation made possible by improved roads expanded the variety of goods that could be
brought to European towns from far away.
CThe increasing importance of commercial trade led to a decline in the influence of traditional sources of
power, such as kings and church leaders.
D.The mining of silver improved the security of commercial transactions by allowing coins to replace credit
and bills of exchange as the means of exchange.
E.The Hanseatic League was an association of European towns that obtained shipping, trading, and financial
benefits for its members.
F.European society became increasingly urban, with better living conditions and a stronger centralized
government.
TPO46-3 Ecosystem Diversity and Stability
1. According to paragraph 1, why has the extinction of
species been a concern for conservation biologists?
A.When ecosystems lose just one species, they
undergo permanent change.
B.The extinction of a particular predator species could
cause an overpopulation of certain prey species.
C.The loss of one or more species could cause the
decline of a whole ecosystem.
D.The extinction of a single species is evidence that
plant-food sources are in danger of disappearing.
2. The word “redundancy ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.duplication
B.variety
C.requirements
D.flexibility
3. What is the function of paragraph 2 in the passage?
A.To present a hypothesis about ecosystem diversity
and some reasons why it might be true
B.To give examples of types of ecosystems that have
the greatest diversity
C.To contradict a previous belief about the stability of
species-rich ecosystems
D.To contrast species-rich and species-poor ecosys
Conservation biologists have long been concerned
that species extinction could have significant
consequences for the stability of entire
ecosystems— groups of interacting organisms and the
physical environment that they inhabit. An ecosystem
could survive the loss of some species, but if enough
species were lost, the ecosystem would be severely
degraded. In fact, it is possible that the loss of a single
important species could start a cascade of extinctions
that might dramatically change an entire ecosystem. A
good illustration of this occurred after sea otters were
eliminated from some Pacific kelp (seaweed) bed
ecosystems: the kelp beds were practically obliterated
too because in the absence of sea otter predation, sea
urchin populations exploded and consumed most of
the kelp and other macroalgae.
It is usually claimed that species-rich ecosystems
tend to be more stable than species-poor ecosystems.
Three mechanisms by which higher diversity increases
ecosystem stability have been proposed. First, if there
are more species in an ecosystem, then its food webwill be more complex, with greater redundancy
among species in terms of their nutritional roles. In
other words, in a rich system if a species is lost, there
is a good chance that other species will take over its
function as prey, predator, producer, decomposer, or
whatever role it played. Second, diverse ecosystems
may be less likely to be invaded by new species,
notably exotics (foreign species living outside
their native range), that would disrupt the ecosystem 'sstructure and function. Third, in a species-rich
ecosystem, diseases may spread more slowly because
most species will be relatively less abundant, thus
increasing the average distance between individuals of
the same species and hampering disease transmission
among individuals.
4. According to paragraph 2, which of the following
increases the stability of an ecosystem?
A.Species in which producers outnumber predators
B.New or exotic species that increase ecosystem
diversity
C.Heavily populated species that are free of disease
D.Species that are diverse but have similar nutritional
roles
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.In any ecosystem, as the number of individuals in
the same species increases, the rate of disease
transmission slows down.
B.Ecosystems that have a small number of different
species tend to be disease-free, because the species'
habitats are at a safe distance from each other.
C.In ecosystems with many species, diseases spread
more slowly because there are fewer individuals in a
species and, as a result, the individuals are more
widely scattered.
D.The average distance between individuals in a
species-rich ecosystem increases, so diseases are
prevented from being communicated between
species.
6. The phrase “compensating for ”in the passage Is
closest in meaning to
A.working against
B.leaving out
C.making up for
D.spreading over
7. What Is the main importance of the study discussed
in paragraph 3?
A.It examines the response of certain grassland plants
to a drought.
B.It contains an index of plants that survived well in
times of drought.
C.It provides scientific evidence that diversity helps to
make ecosystems stable.
D.It shows that ecosystems contain both resistant
species and less tolerant ones.
8. Select the TWO answer choices that, according to
paragraph 4, are conclusions that can be drawn from
the study by Tilman and Downing. To receive credit
you must select TWO answer choices.
A.A diverse ecosystem will have species that respond
differently to a variety of conditions.
B.Species within a species-rich ecosystem are more
likely to have competitors.
C.An ecosystem is more likely to develop diverse and
stable species when it is exposed to extreme
conditions.
D.Species with similar ecological functions will
perform the function of a lost species.
Scientific evidence to illuminate these ideas has
been slow in coming, and many shadows remain. 
One of the first studies to provide data supporting a
relationship between diversity and stability examined
how grassland plants responded to a drought. 
Researchers D. Tilman and J A. Downing used the ratio
of above-ground biomass in 1988 (after two years of
drought) to that in 1986 (predrought) in 207 plots in a
grassland field in the Cedar Creek Natural History Area
in Minnesota as an index of ecosystem response to
disruption by drought. In an experiment that began
in 1982, they compared these values with the number
of plant species in each plot and discovered that the
plots with a greater number of plant species
experienced a less dramatic reduction in biomass. 
Plots with more than ten species had about half as
much biomass in 1988 as in 1986, whereas those with
fewer than five species only produced roughly
one-eighth as much biomass after the two-year
drought. Apparently, species-rich plots were likely to
contain some drought-resistant plant species thatgrew better in drought years, compensating for the
poor growth of less-tolerant species.
To put this result in more general terms, a
species-rich ecosystem may be more stable because it
is more likely to have species with a wide array of
responses to variable conditions such as droughts.
Furthermore, a species-rich ecosystem is more likely
to have species with similar ecological functions, so
that if a species is lost from an ecosystem, another
species, probably a competitor, is likely to flourish and
occupy its functional role. Both of these, variability in
responses and functional redundancy, could be
thought of as insurance against disturbances.
640The Minnesota grassland research has been widely
accepted as strong evidence for the diversity- stability
theory; however, its findings have been questioned,
and similar studies on other ecosystems have not
always found a positive relationship between diversity
and stability. Clearly, this is a complex issue that
requires further field research with a broad spectrum
of ecosystems and species: grassland plants and
computer models will only take us so far. In the end,despite insightful attempts to detect some general
patterns, we may find it very difficult to reduce this
topic to a simple, universal truth.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
It seems clear that there is room for a great deal more research, although some work has been done.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions : An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points .
Biologists have long been worried about the possible effect of the extinction of species on whole
ecosystems.
Answer Choices
A.Conservation biology studies Indicate that the loss of a single important species may bring temporary
change to an ecosystem but it seldom results in lasting damage.
B.Ecosystems having species with similar functions but different responses to adverse conditions can survive
environmental disturbances.
C.The Minnesota grassland study by Tilman and Downing presented evidence that the greater the diversity of
species in an ecosystem, the more stable the ecosystem.
D.The absence of sea otter predation in a Pacific kelp bed ecosystem dramatically changed the entire
ecosystem by stabilizing the total kelp population.
E.The findings of the Minnesota grassland study by Tilman and Downing indicated an equal number of
drought-resistant and drought-tolerant plant species in species-rich plots.
F.More research is needed on the relationship between species diversity and ecosystem stability, though a
simple explanation is unlikely.
TPO47
TPO47-1 Roman Cultural Influence on Britain
1.Paragraph 1 suggests that one benefit for British
natives in buying such items as red-gloss pottery made
in Gaul was
A. improved quality of utilitarian items
B. Understanding the symbolism of Classical
mythology
C. higher social standing
D. Learning to mass-produce pottery for a profit
2. Paragraph 1 supports which of the following ideas
about contacts that existed between Britain and the
Roman Empire before the Roman conquest of Britain?
A. They were sufficient for native Britons to become
familiar with everyday Roman objects.
B. They were not sufficient for even very basic aspects
of the culture of the Roman Empire to find their way
into British life.
C. They were not sufficient for British to have heard of
the power of the Roman Empire.
D. They were sufficient for individual Britons to
become very interested in trying to participate in the
culture of the Roman Empire.
3. According to paragraph 2, the style and furnishings
of the Fishbourne villa suggest that the person for
whom it was built was
A. cultured according to the contemporary standards
of the empire
B. caught between native and Roman traditions
C. originally a visitor from Rome
D. a member of a socially inferior family
After the Roman Empire 's conquest of Britain in
the first century A.D., the presence of administrators,
merchants, and troops on British soil, along with the
natural flow of ideas and goods from the rest of the
empire, had an enormous influence on life in the
British Isles. Cultural influences were of three types:
the bringing of objects, the transfer of craft workers,
and the introduction of massive civil architecture.
Many objects were not art in even the broadest sense
and comprised utilitarian items of clothing, utensils,
and equipment. We should not underestimate thesocial status associated with such mundane
possessions which had not previously been available.
The flooding of Britain with red-gloss pottery form
Gaul (modern-day France), decorated with scenes
from Classical mythology, probably brought many into
contact with the styles and artistic concepts of the
Greco-Roman world for the first time, whether or not
the symbolism was understood. Mass-produced goods
were accompanied by fewer more aesthetically
impressive objects such as statuettes. Such pieces
perhaps first came with officials for their own religious
worship; others were then acquired by native leaders
as diplomatic gifts or by purchase. Once seen by the
natives, such objects created a fashion which rapidly
spread through the province.
In the most extreme instances, natives literally
bought the whole package of Roman culture. The
Fishbourne villa, built in the third quarter of the first
century A.D., probably for the native client king
Cogidubnus, amply illustrates his Roman pretensions.
It was constructed in the latest Italian style withimported marbles and stylish mosaics. It was lavishly
furnished with imported sculptures and other Classical
objects. A visitor from Rome would have recognized its
owner as a participant in the contemporary culture of
4. According to paragraph 3, one factor contributing to
success of the earliest Roman-style construction
projects in Britain was
A. the fact that long before the conquest many civilian
workers from Gaul and Germany had settled in Britain
B. the rapid development of characteristically
Romano-British styles
C. the availability, in northeast Gaul, of structures that
could serve as standards to be copied
D. the use, by administrators, of personal connections
to bring craft workers form Gaul into contact with
Britons
5. In paragraph 4, why does the author mention that
“Pre-Roman Britain was highly localized, with people
rarely traveling beyond their own region ”?
A. To suggest that the Roman conquest of Britain
increased the standard of living for natives
B. To indicate that pre-Roman Britain was more
interested in festivals and community life than
conquering other regions
C. To explain why architecture during this period was
not built to be particularly large
D. To illustrate how the traditional roundhouse
evolved under the influence of Roman civil
architecture
the empire, not at all provincial in taste. Even if those
from the traditional families looked down on him, they
would have been unable to dismiss him as
uncultured.
Although exceptional, this demonstrateshow new cultural symbols bound provincials to the
identity of the Roman world.
Such examples established a standard to be
copied. One result was an influx of craft worker,
particularly those skilled in artistic media like
stone-carving which had not existed before the
conquest. Civilian workers came mostly from Gaul and
Germany. The magnificent temple built beside thesacred spring at Bath was constructed only about
twenty years after the conquest. Its detail shows that
it was carved by artists from northeast Gaul. In the
absence of a tradition of Classical stone-carving and
building, the desire to develop Roman amenities
would have been difficult to fulfill. Administrators thus
used their personal contacts to put the Britons in
touch with architects and masons. As many of the
officials in Britain had strong links with Gaul, it is not
surprising that early Roman Britain owes much to craft
workers from that area. Local workshops did develop
and stylistically similar groups of sculpture show how
skills in this new medium became widerspread.
Likewise skills in the use of mosaic, wall painting,
ceramic decoration, and metal-working developed
throughout the province with the eventual emergence
of characteristically Romano-British styles.
This art had a major impact on the native peoples, and
one of the most importance factors was a change inthe scale of buildings. Pre-Roman Britain was highly
localized, with people rarely traveling beyond their
own region. On occasion large groups amassed for war
or religious festivals, but society remained centered
on small communities. Architecture of this era
reflected this with even the largest of the fortified
towns and hill forts containing no more than clusters
of medium-sized structures. The spaces inside eventhe largest roundhouses were modest , and the use of
rounded shapes and organic building materials gave
buildings a human scale. But the effect of Roman
civil architecture was significant. The sheer size of
space enclosed within buildings like the basilica of
London must have been astonishing. This was an
644architecture of dominance in which subject peoples
were literally made to feel small by buildings that
epitomized imperial power. Supremacy was
6. The word “modest”in the passage in closet in
meaning to
A. comfortable
B. limited in number
C. poorly lit
D. not large
7. According to paragraph 4, people in pre-Roman
Britain lived, for the most part, in
A. architecture that seemed imperial in size
B. small communities
C. large roundhouses
D. fortified towns
8. According to paragraph 4, why did straight lines in
buildings and settlements emphasize the dominance
of those who introduced them?
A. Because straight lines were in contrast to the
shapes found in pre-Roman architecture
B. Because unlike curved lines, which are shaped in all
sorts of different ways, straight lines do no differ
C. Because the dominant lines in entire settlements
were the same as those in individual buildings
D. Because building and settlements were easier to
construct when the dominant lines were straight linesaccentuated by the unyielding straight lines of both
individual buildings and planned settlements since
these too provided a marked contrast with the natural
curvilinear shapes dominant in the native realm. 
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Practical and unimpressive, most were barely taller than the average adult.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below.
Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 3 points.
The conquest of Britain by the Roman Empire resulted in significant cultural change.



Answer Choices
A. New objects entering Britain ranged from mass-produced articles for everyday use to works of art, and
they were widely-and enthusiastically-accepted by native Britons.
B. Constructing and furnishing buildings in the Roman style required skills that native workers did not at first
have, so workers were brought in from other parts of the empire.
C. Native Britons traveled to Gaul to learn Classical stone-carving and building techniques.
D. The conquest was followed by a building boom, and enough villas and temples in the Italian style were
built that a visitor from Rome would have felt quite at home in post-conquest Britain.
E. An important symbol of Roman supremacy was Roman architecture, whose enormous size, emphasized by
the use of straight lines, made the natives feel insignificant.
F. Characteristically Romano-British concepts took hold in architecture; roundhouses were built much larger
than before, and straight lines began to be used in interior spaces.
TPO47-2 Termite Ingenuity
1. According to paragraph 1, which of the following is
true about termites?
A. They are a kind of ant, but they are unlike most ants
in many ways.
B. They form colonies that grow at first and then
gradually decline.
C. Their workers are all males, and their soldiers are all
females.
D. They go through a life state called the nymph stage.
2. According to paragraph 2, termites need to live in
nests with high humidity in order to
A. keep their food moist
B. withstand cold temperatures in winter
C. protect their bodies from drying out
D. keep nest temperatures high
Termites, social insects which live in colonies that, in
some species, contain 2 million individuals or more,
are often incorrectly referred to as white ants . But
they are certainly not ants. Termites, unlike ants, have
gradual metarnorphosis with only three life stage: egg,
nymph, and adult. Ants and the other social members
of their order, certain bees and wasps, have complete
metarnorphosis in four life stages; egg, larva, pupa,
and adult. The worker and soldier castes of social ants,
bees, and wasps consist of only females, all daughters
of a single queen that mated soon after she matured
and thereafter never mated again. The worker and
soldier castes of termites consist of both males and
females, and the queen lives permanently with a male
consort.
Since termites are small and soft-bodied, they
easily become desiccated and must live in moist places
with a high relative humidity. They do best when the
relative humidity in their nest is above 96 percent and
the temperature is fairly high, an optimum of about
79°F for temperate zone species and about 86 °F for
tropical species. Subterranean termites, the
destructive species that occurs commonly throughoutthe eastern United States, attain these conditions by
nesting in moist soil that is in contact with wood, their
only food. The surrounding soil keeps the nest moist
and tends to keep the temperature at a more or less
favorable level. When it is cold in winter, subterranean
termites move to burrows below the frost line.
Some tropical termites are more ingenious
engineers, constructing huge above-ground nests with
built-in“air conditioning ”that keeps the nest moist, at
a constant temperature, and well supplied with
647oxygen. Among the most architecturally advanced of
these termites is an African species, Macroternes
3. According to paragraph 3, the nests of some tropical
termite species have the ability to
A. insulate the microclimate in one part of the nest
from the microclimate in another part
B. Allow moist outside air to get inside regardless of
whether it is warm or cool
C. rapidly decrease the humidity inside when it gets
hot outside
D. Provide the oxygen needed in the nes
4. According to paragraphs 3 and 4, all of the following
are true of the nests of Macroternes natalensis
EXCEPT:
A. The walls are built out of soil mixed with termite
saliva.
B. The nests can be as tall as they are wide at the
base.
C. The interior of the nest is kept as humid as possible.
D. The termites use hollow, thin-walled ridges to travel
from one part of the nest to another.
5. According to paragraph 4, how does the fungus
grown by Macrotermes natalensis affect the
environment of the nest?
A. It carries water up from the soil into the interior.
B. It dries the air by using up moisture as it grows.
C. It heats and adds humidity to the inside of the nest.
D. It lessens the effects of the metabolism of so many
termites.
6. According to paragraph 5, what does the thinness of
the ridge walls make possible?
A. The concentration of cool air in the cellar
B. The construction of exceptionally long tunnels
C. The even distribution of oxygen from attic to cellar
D. The diffusion of gases into and out of the ridgesnatalensis . Renowned Swiss entomologist Martin
Luscher described the mounds of this fungus-growing
species as being as much as 16 feet tall, 16 feet in
diameter at their base, and with a cement-like wall of
soil mixed with termite saliva that is from 16 to 23
inches thick. The thick and dense wall of the mound
insulates the interior microclimate from the variations
in humidity and temperature of the outside
atmosphere. Several narrow and relatively thin-walled
ridges on the outside of the mound extend from near
its base almost to its top.
According to luscher, a medium-sized nest of
Macrotermes has a population of about 2 million
individuals. The metabolism of so many termites and
of the fungus that they grow in their gardens as food
helps keep the interior of the nest warm and supplies
some moisture to the air in the nest. The termites
saturate the atmosphere of the nest, bringing it to
about 100 percent relative humidity, by carrying water
up from the soil.
But how is this well-insulated nest ventilated? Its
many occupants require over 250 quarts of oxygen
(more than 1,200 quarts of air) per day. How can so
much oxygen diffuse through the thick walls of the
mound? Even the pores in the wall are filled with
water, which almost stops the diffusion of gases. The
answer lies in the construction of the nest. The
interior consists of a large central core in which the
fungus is grown, below it is “cellar”of empty space,
above it is an “attic”of empty space, and within the
ridges on the outer wall of the nest,
7. According to paragraph 5, what happens to the air
in the ridge tunnels of Macrotermes natalensis nests?
A. It becomes more humid as water vapor diffuses into
the tunnels.
B. It loses carbon dioxide and gains oxygen.
C. It reaches the interior of the nest through pores in
the walls.
D. It moves in the same direction as the air in the
center of the nest.
8. Paragraph 5 supports which of the following about
the air that flows through the interior of a
Macrotermes natalensis mound?
A. It has a higher concentration of oxygen in the cellar
than in the attic.
B. It is the same temperature as the air on the outside
of the mound.
C. It contains over 250 quarts of oxygen which
circulate continuously.
D. It is most humid in the cellar and gradually loses
moisture as it rises to the attic.there are many small tunnels that connect the cellar
and the attic. The warm air in the fungus gardens
rises through the nest up to the attic. From the attic,
the air passes into the tunnels in the ridges and flows
back down to the cellar. Gases, mainly oxygen coming
in and carbon dioxide going out, easily diffuse into or
out of the ridges, since their walls are thin and their
surface area is large because they protrude far out
from the wall of the mound. Thus air that flows down
into the cellar through the ridges is relatively rich in
oxygen, and has lost much of its carbon dioxide. It
supplies the nest 's inhabitants with fresh oxygen as it
rises through the fungus-growing area back up to the
attic.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
If not through the walls or its pores, how does oxygen enter the nest at all, since the nest has a closed
surface?
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below.
Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 3 points.
Termites are social insects that live in large, often elaborately constructed nests.
Answer Choices
A. Although termites resemble ants in terms of size, metarmorphosis, and social organization, they actually
belong to a different order of insects.
B. Some termites build their nests underground, while other construct above-ground structures with thick,
insulating wall.
C. Some termite species grow a fungus in their nests so that it will purify the air by taking in carbon dioxide
and giving off oxygen.
D. Termites are sensitive to dryness and to changes in temperature, so their nests are designed to minimize
these factors.
E. Whether they lie above ground or below ground, termite nests must include special pores that allow air to
enter the nests.
F. The nests of Macrotermes natalensis consist of a series of chambers and tunnels that allow for the
circulation of air and the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
TPO47-3 Coral Reefs
1. According to paragraph 1, all of the following are
needed for the growth of coral reefs?
A. a solid base to grow on
B. exposure to light
C. the presence of river-borne sediment
D. ocean temperatures of 21 °C or higher2. The word “complex ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to?
A. extension
B. system
C. region
D. Variety
An important environment that is more or less
totally restricted to the intertropical zone is the coral
reef. Coral reefs are found where the ocean water
temperature is not less than 21 °C, where there is a
firm substratum, and where the seawater is not
rendered too dark by excessive amounts of
river-borne sediment. They will not grow in very deep
water, so a platform within 30 to 40 meters of the
surface is a necessary prerequisite for their
development. Their physical structure is dominated by
the skeletons of corals, which are carnivorous animals
living off zooplankton. However, in addition to corals
there are enormous quantities of algae, some
calcareous, which help to build the reefs. The size of
reefs is variable. Some atolls are very large —Kwajelein
in the Marshall Islands of the South Pacific is 120
kilometers long and as much as 24 kilometers
across-but most are very much smaller, and rise only a
few meters above the water. The 2,000 kilometercomplex of reefs known as the Great Barrier Reef,
which forms a gigantic natural breakwater off the
northeast coast of Australia, is by far the greatest coral
structure on Earth.
3. The word “pertinent ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. extraordinary
B. relevant
C. intelligent
D. famous
4. According to paragraph 2, which of the following is
NOT characteristics of a barrier reef?
A. It is located away from the shore of the neighboring
land.
B. It is separated from neighboring land by a wide
channel.
C. It is located in deep ocean water.
D. It surrounds a small, central lagoon.
5. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A. Darwin claimed that, of the three types of coral
reefs, only an atoll would be able to survive on a
sinking platform.
B. Darwin recognized that coral reefs achieved success
by growing upward from a sinking land platform and
becoming an atoll.
C. Darwin argued that as a coral reef grew up from a
sinking island, it would become a fringing reef, then a
barrier reef, and finally, with the disappearance of the
island, an atoll.
D. Darwin 's theory helped explain the disappearance
of a number of islands by showing how coral reef
growth caused them to sink below the ocean surface.
Coral reefs have fascinated scientists for almost
200 years, and some of the most pertinent
observations of them were made in the 1830s by
Charles Darwin on the voyage of the Beagle. He
recognized that there were three major kinds: fringing
reefs, barrier reefs, and atolls; and he saw that they
were related to each other in a logical and gradational
sequence. A fringing reef is one that lies close to the
shore of some continent or island. Its surface forms an
uneven and rather rough platform around the coast,
about the level of low water, and its outer edge slopes
downwards into the sea. Between the fringing reef
and the land there is sometimes a small channel or
lagoon. When the lagoon is wide and deep and the
reef lies at some distance from the shore and rises
from deep water it is called a barrier reef. An atoll is a
reef in the form of a ring or horseshoe with a lagoon in
the center.
Darwin's theory was that the succession from one
coral reef type to another could be achieved by the
upward growth of coral from a sinking platform, and
that there would be a progression from a fringing reef,
through the barrier reef stage until, with the
disappearance through subsidence (sinking) of the
central island, only a reef-enclosed lagoon or atoll
would survive. A long time after Darwin put forward
this theory, some deep boreholes were drilled in the
Pacific atolls in the 1950s. The drill holes passed
through more than a thousand meters of coral before
reaching the rock substratum of the ocean floor , and
indicated that the coral had been growing upward for
tens of millions of years as Earth's crust subsided at a
rate of between 15 and 51 meters per million years.
Darwin s theory was therefore proved basically correct.
There are some submarine islands called guyots and
seamounts, in which subsidence associated with
sea-floor spreading has been too speedy for coral
growth to keep up.
6. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 3 about the Pacific atolls?
A. They were once fringing reefs around the coasts of
islands.
B. They were first observed by Darwin during his
voyage on the Beagle.
C. They will eventually become fringing reefs.
D. They are located where the ocean floor does not
sink.
7.Why does the passage provide the information
that the drill holes in the Pacific atolls passed through
more than a thousand meters of coral before reaching
the rock substratum of the ocean floor?
A.To emphasize that according to Darwin 's view
coral can grow at great depths B.To indicate how
scientists knew the rate at which Earth 's crust had
subsided C.To support the claim that coral reefs take
millions of years to form D.To present the evidence
that confirmed Darwin 's account of coral reef
evolution
8. According to paragraph 4, why have coral reefs
been compared to tropical rain forests?
A. Both are located near the Indian and western
Pacific Oceans.
B. Both are home to a wide variety of species.
C. Both play an important role in protecting coastal
islands.
D. Both are threatened by the erosion of nearby land.
Like mangrove swamps, coral reefs are extremely
important habitats. Their diversity of coral genera is
greatest in the warm waters of the Indian Ocean and
the western Pacific. Indeed, they have been called
the marine version of the tropical rain forest, rivaling
their terrestrial counterparts in both richness of
species and biological productivity. They also have
significance because they provide coastal protection,
opportunities for recreation, and are potential sources
of substances like medicinal drugs. At present they
are coming under a variety of threats, of which two of
the most important are dredging and the effects of
increased siltation brought about by accelerated
erosion from neighboring land areas. 
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Yet because many coral reef organisms can tolerate only a narrow range of environmental conditions, reefs
are sensitive to damage from environmental changes.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Coral reefs constitute an important tropical environment that provides habitat for a rich variety of ocean
life.
Answer Choices
A. Coral reefs are structures made by living creatures and can grow only in specific ocean conditions.
B. Although atolls can sometimes grow to large proportions, barrier reefs are by far the largest coral
structures.
C. Mangrove swamps are as important as coral reefs as the habitat for numerous plant and animal species.
D. Coral reefs are classified as fringing, barrier, or atoll, all of which are linked in a chain of progressive
development.
E. Although coral reefs are important to humans in several ways, they are currently threatened by dredging
and mud from erosion.
F. Fringing reefs lie close to the shore of continents and islands, forming a transition zone between the land
mass and the sea.
TPO48
TPO48-1 Chinese Population Growth
1. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A. Commerce, industrialization, and development are
common features of the Western experience.
B. Trade, industrialization, and development
accelerated social change in Western societies.
C. Trade and industrialization brought about
development in Western societies.
D. In Western societies, social change provided the
conditions for development in a number of areas.
2. The word “attributed ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. accustomed
B. credited
C. exposed
D. transformed
3. According to paragraphs 1 and 2, which of the
following is true of Chinese population growth
between 1741and 1851?
A. It coincided with the beginning of industrialization
in China.
B. It prompted speculation about the actual number
of people living in China in previous centuries.
C. It continued the steady growth in population of
previous centuries.
D. It occurred in the absence of certain conditions
generally associated with population growth.
4. According to paragraph2, the estimated population
of China in the mid 1700s was?
A. 143 million
B. 150 million
C. 400 million
D. 432 million
Increases in population have usually been
accompanied (indeed facilitated) by an increase in
trade. In the Western experience, commerce provided
the conditions that allowed industrialization to get
started, which in turn led to growth in science,
technology, industry, transport, communications,
social change, and the like that we group under the
broad term of “development. ”However, the massive
increase in population that in Europe was at first
attributed to industrialization starting in the
eighteenth century occurred also and at the same
period in China, even though there was no
comparable industrialization.
It is estimated that the Chinese population by
1600 was close to 150 million. The transition between
the Ming and Qing dynasties (the seventeenth century)
may have seen a decline, but from 1741 to 1851 the
annual figures rose steadily and spectacularly, perhaps
beginning with 143 million and ending with 432
million. If we accept these totals, we are confronted
with a situation in which the Chinese population
doubled in the 50 years from 1790 to 1840. If, with
greater caution, we assume lower totals in the early
eighteenth century and only 400 million in 1850, we
still face a startling fact: something like a doubling of
the vast Chinese population in the century before
Western contact, foreign trade, and industrialization
could have had much effect.
5.The word “aggregate ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.available
B.reliable
C.combined
D.recorded
6.What can be inferred from ◆paragraph 5 about the
introduction of corn and sweet potatoes in China?
A.These crops required much more care than other
crops.
B.These crops were consumed in limited quantities.
C.These crops permitted an expansion of the area
used for farming.
D.These crops became available all over China within a
short period of time.
To explain this sudden increase we cannot point
to factors constant in Chinese society but must find
conditions or a combination of factors that were
newly effective in this period. Among these is the
almost complete internal peace maintained under
Manchu rule during the eighteenth century. There was
also an increase in foreign trade through Guangzhou
(southern China) and some improvement of
transportation within the empire. Control of disease,
like the checking of smallpox by variolation may have
been important. But of most critical importance was
the food supply.
Confronted with a multitude of unreliable figures,
economists have compared the population recordswith the aggregate data for cultivated land area and
grain production in the six centuries since 1368.
Assuming that China 's population in 1400 was about
80 million, the economist Dwight Perkins concludes
that its growth to 700 million or more in the 1960s
was made possible by a steady increase in the grain
supply, which evidently grew five or six times between
1400 and 1800 and rose another 50 percent between
1800 and 1965. This increase of food supply was due
perhaps half to the increase of cultivated area,
particularly by migration and settlement in the central
and western provinces, and half to greater
productivity —the farmers' success in raising more
crops per unit of land.
8.What purpose does ◆paragraph 5 serve in the larger
discussion about China 's population growth?
A.It provides evidence of China 's emerging foreign
trade relations.
B.It illustrates how the Chinese increased their food
supply.
C.It provides evidence of why population growth was
most noticeable in the south.
D.It shows how foreign crops gradually gained greater
acceptance in China.
This technological advance took many forms: one
was the continual introduction from the south of
earlier-ripening varieties of rice, which made possible
double-cropping (the production of two harvests per
year from one field). New crops such as corn (maize)
and sweet potatoes as well as peanuts and tobacco
were introduced from the Americas. Corn, for
instance, can be grown on the dry soil and marginal
hill land of North China, where it is used for food, fuel,
and fodder and provides something like one-seventh
of the food energy available in the area. The sweet
potato, growing in sandy soil and providing more food
energy per
unit of land than other crops, became the main food
of the poor in much of the South China rice area. 
Productivity in agriculture was also improved by
capital investments, first of all in irrigation. From 1400
to 1900 the total of irrigated land seems to have
increased almost three times. There was also a gain in
farm tools, draft animals, and fertilizer, to say nothing
of the population growth itself, which increased half
again as fast as cultivated land area and so increasedthe ratio of human hands available per unit of land.
Thus the rising population was fed by a more intensive
agriculture, applying more labor and fertilizer to the
land.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Other developments addressed the problems of dry and sandy areas unsuitable for growing China 's native
crops.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Over the centuries, China has experienced an extraordinary increase in its population.
Answer Choices
A. Understanding the exceptional increase in population in China requires giving up commonly held
assumptions relative to the phenomenon of population growth.
B. The economist Dwight Perkins applied a particular statistical method to determine the increase in China 's
population.
C. The sudden population growth in China started in its northern and southern provinces, and it spread
rapidly to the central and western areas of the country.
D. Improved transportation management and enhanced disease control contributed to China 's population
explosion.
E. The increase in China 's food supply, which affected population growth, was the result of technological
developments in agriculture and capital investment.
F. A steady increase in foreign trade since the 1400s provided the conditions necessary for large-scale
agricultural development.
TPO48-2 Determining Dinosaur Diet
1. The word “Traditionally ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. typically
B. naturally
C. originally
D. partly
2. According to paragraph 2, which of the following is
true of the teeth of carnivores?
A.Carnivores' teeth for grinding and shredding are
located in the front of their jaws.
B.Carnivore teeth are designed to break down food
thoroughly before digestion.
C.Carnivores have teeth at the back of their jaws that
are as sharp as their front teeth.
D.Carnivores have both sharp teeth for slicing meat
and flat teeth for grinding meat.
3. In paragraph 2, the author compares the teeth of
cows, horses, rabbits, and mice to grindstones in order
to explain
A. how certain kinds of teeth aid digestion
B. how the teeth of some familiar mammals differ
from those of dinosaurs
C. why the back teeth of herbivores are larger than
those of carnivores
D. why the back teeth of carnivores are just as sharp
as their front teeth
Determining what extinct dinosaurs ate is difficult, but
we can infer some aspects of their dietary preferences.
Traditionally , this information has been derived from
direct evidence, such as stomach contents, and
indirect evidence, such as establishing a correlation
between particular body characteristics and diets of
living animals and then inferring habits for dinosaurs.
Animals such as house cats and dogs have large,
stabbing canine teeth at the front of the mouth and
smaller, equally sharp teeth farther back in their jaws.
Many of these animals are also armed with sharp
claws. The advantage of teeth and claws as predatory
tools is obvious. Now consider animals like cows,
horses, rabbits, and mice. These animals have flat
teeth at the back of the jaw that are analogous to and
have the same function as grindstones. Unlike the
meat-slicing and stabbing teeth of carnivores, the
teeth of these animals grind and shred plant material
before digestion.
More clues exist in other parts of the skull. The
jaw joint of carnivores such as dogs and cats has the
mechanical advantage of being at the same level as
the tooth row, allowing the jaws to close with
tremendous speed and forcing the upper teeth to
occlude against the lower teeth with great precision .
In herbivorous animals, rapid jaw closure is less
important. Because the flat teeth of herbivores work
like grindstones, however, the jaws mush move both
side to side and front to back. The jaw joints of many
advanced herbivores, such as cows, lie at a different
level than the tooth row, allowing transverse tearing,shredding, and compression of plant material. If we
659extend such observations to extinct dinosaurs, we can
4.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The advantage of bringing the upper teeth
directly against the lower teeth is a more precise bite.
B.Animals whose jaw joint is at the same level as
their teeth can bite quickly and accurately.
C.The location of an animal's jaw joint in respect
to its teeth determines the speed at which it can close
its jaws.
D.The carnivore jaw has the advantage of
allowing the upper teeth to move with greater speed
and precision than the lower teeth do.
5. The word “compression ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. destruction
B. crushing
C. swallowing
D. removal
6. According to paragraphs 3 and 4, what can studies
of living animals help scientists determine about
individual dinosaurs?
A.How the overall jaw size of a given dinosaur species
relates to the type of food the species members ate
B.Whether a given dinosaur generally ate plants or
generally ate meat
C.How much food a given dinosaur would have
needed to eat to remain healthy
D.How an inadequate diet may have affected a given
dinosaur's skull and jawinfer dietary preferences (such as carnivory and
herbivory), even though we cannot determine the
exact diet. The duck-billed dinosaurs known as
hadrosaurs are a good example of a group whose jaw
joint is below the level of the tooth row, which
probably helped them grind up tough, fibrous
vegetation.
Paleontologists would like to be much more
specific about a dinosaur's diet than simply
differentiating carnivore from herbivore. This finer
level of resolution requires direct fossil evidence of
dinosaur meals. Stomach contents are only rarely
preserved, but when present, allow us to determine
exactly what these animals were eating.
In the stomach contents of specimens of
Coelophysis (a small, long-necked dinosaur) are bones
from juvenile animals of the same species. At one time,
these were thought to represent embryonic animals,
suggesting that this small dinosaur gave birth to live
young rather than laying eggs. Further research
indicated that the small dinosaurs were too large and
too well developed to be prehatchling young. In
addition, the juveniles inside the body cavity were of
7.According to paragraph 5, all of the following
support the claim that the adult Coelophysis
sometimes ate young Coelophysis EXCEPT:
A.Juveniles found in the body cavities of adults were
too advanced in their development to be embryos.
B.Juveniles of different sizes were found in the body
cavity of the same adult.
C.Juveniles found in the body cavities of adults were
too large to be embryos.
D.Juveniles found in the body cavities of adults were
in unhatched eggs.
8.Which of the following questions is NOT answered in
the passage?
A.Why did paleontologists once believe that
Coelophysis gave birth to live young?
B.Why is it unusual for the stomach contents of
dinosaurs to be preserved?
C.What are some dinosaurs in which the fossilized
remains of plants have been found?
D.What difficulty do scientists face in using
coprolites to draw conclusions about dinosaur diet?different sizes. All the evidence points to the
conclusion that these are the remains of prey items
and that, as an adult, Coelophysis was at least in part a
cannibal.
Fossilized stomach contents are not restricted to
carnivorous dinosaurs. In a few rare cases, most of
them“mummies ” (unusually well preserved
specimens), fossilized plant remains have been found
inside the body cavity of hadrosaurs. Some
paleontologists have argued that these represent
stream accumulations rather than final meals. The
best known of these cases is the second
Edmontosaurus mummy collected by the Sternbergs.
In the chest cavity of this specimen, which is housed in
the Senckenberg Museum in Germany, are the fossil
remains of conifer needles, twigs, seeds, and fruits.
Similar finds in Corythosaurus specimens from Alberta,
Canada, have also been reported, indicating that at
least two kinds of Late Cretaceous hadrosaurs fed on
the sorts of tress that are common in today's boreal
woodlands.
A.second form of direct evidence comes from
coprolites (fossilized bodily waste). Several dinosaur
fossil localities preserve coprolites. Coprolites yield
unequivocal evidence about the dietary habits of
dinosaurs. Many parts of plants and animals are
extremely resistant to the digestive systems of animals
and pass completely through the body with little or no
alteration. Study of coprolites has indicated that the
diets of some herbivorous dinosaurs were relativelydiverse , while other dinosaurs appear to have been
specialists, feeding on particular types of plants. The
problem with inferring diets from coprolites is the
difficulty in accurately associating a particular
coprolite with a specific dinosaur.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Unfortunately, studies of living animals provide only a very general understanding of what various
dinosaurs ate.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage
10.Directions : An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 3 points.
Scientists use both direct and indirect evidence to determine the dietary preferences of dinosaurs.
Answer Choices
A. Observations of fossilized remains indicate that most dinosaurs preferred to eat plants rather than animals.
B. Specific information about a dinosaur's diet can sometimes be obtained from the fossilized contents of its
stomach.
C. A better understanding of how different dinosaurs reproduced and developed has helped paleontologists
determine actual food requirements at different stages of the life cycle.
D. The shape of a dinosaur's teeth and the structure of its jaws indicate, as do the teeth and jaws of modern
animals, the general kind of food the dinosaur ate.
E. Fossils formed from dinosaur's bodily waste can provide clues to what dinosaurs consumed, but such
fossils cannot be easily associated with specific dinosaurs.
F. Generally speaking, dinosaurs that were herbivores had a more varied diet than did dinosaurs that were
carnivores.
TPO48-3 Climate and Urban Development
1. The word “involved ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. uncertain
B. complicated
C. common
D. clear2. The word “retarded”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. disguised
B. added to
C. made possible
D. slowed down
4.◆Paragraph 3 supports which of the following
claims about the interpretation of temperature
records?
A.The climate may not be warming as much as
the increase of temperatures recorded in cities
appears to suggest.
B.Records show that the increase in urban heat
islands has had a significant warming effect on the
global climate.
C.During most of the past century, temperature
records have been misinterpreted.
D.Scientists will not be able to account forclimate
change over the past century until they learn more
about the urban heat island.
For more than a hundred years, it has been known
that cities are generally warmer than surrounding
rural areas. This region of city warmth, known as the
urban heat island, can influence the concentration of
air pollution. However, before we look at its influence,
let's see how the heat island actually forms.
The urban heat island is due to industrial and
urban development. In rural areas, a large part of the
incoming solar energy is used in evaporating water
from vegetation and soil. In cities, where less
vegetation and exposed soil exist, the majority of the
Sun's energy is absorbed by urban structures and
asphalt. Hence, during warm daylight hours, less
evaporative cooling in cities allows surface
temperatures to rise higher than in rural areas. Thecause of the urban heat island is quite involved .
Depending on the location, time of year, and time of
day, any or all of the following differences between
cities and their surroundings can be important: albedo
(reflectivity of the surface), surface roughness,
emissions of heat, emissions of moisture, and
emissions of particles that affect net radiation and the
growth of cloud droplets.
At night, the solar energy (stored as vast
quantities of heat in city buildings and roads) is slowly
released into the city air. Additional city heat is given
off at night (and during the day) by vehicles and
factories, as well as by industrial and domestic heating
and cooling units. The release of heat energy isretarded by the tall vertical city walls that do not allow
infrared radiation to escape as readily as does the
relatively level surface of the surrounding countryside.
The slow release of heat tends to keep nighttime city
temperatures higher than those of the faster-cooling
rural areas. Overall, the heat island is strongest (1) at
night when compensating sunlight is absent; (2)
during the winter, when nights are longer and there is
more heat generated in the city; and (3) when the
region is dominated by a high- pressure area with light
3. According to paragraph 4, how do pollutants reduce
the distance it is possible to see?
A. They increase the amount of sunlight that reaches
the ground.
B. They increase the relative humidity.
C. They form particles that irritate the eye.
D. They serve as nuclei around which water
condenses.winds, clear skies, and less humid air. Over time,
increasing urban heat islands affect climatological
temperature records, producing artificial warming in
climatic records taken in cities. This warming,
therefore, must be accounted for in interpreting
climate change over the past century.
The constant outpouring of pollutants into the
environment may influence the climate of the city.
Certain particles reflect solar radiation, thereby
reducing the sunlight that reaches the surface. Some
particles serve as nuclei upon which water and ice
form. Water vapor condenses onto these particles
when the relative humidity is as low as 70 percent,
forming haze that greatly reduces visibility. Moreover,
the added nuclei increase the frequency of city fog.
5.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Until more studies are done, suggestions about
the causes of precipitation in cities will focus on the
roughness of terrain rather than on surface air and
convergence
B.Certain phenomena of city landscapes,
such as large structures, cause surface air to slow and
converge, which brings a change in weather patterns
to cities and rural areas. C.One reason why
precipitation may be greater in cities than in the
countryside is that large buildings that are found in
cities cause surface air to slow and converge.
D.Studies that focus on large structures, which are
only partly responsible for the increased roughness of
city terrain, are incomplete in their explanation of
increased precipitation.
6.The word “both”in the passage refers to
A.piling up and warming of air
B.clouds and thunderstorms
C.warm surface air and rising air motions
D.heat and instability
Studies suggest that precipitation may be greater
in cities than in the surrounding countryside; this
phenomenon may be due in part to the increased
roughness of city terrain, brought on by large
structures that cause surface air to slow and gradually
converge. This piling up of air over the city then slowly
rises, much like toothpaste does when its tube is
squeezed. At the same time, city heat warms the
surface air, making it more unstable, which enhances
risings air motions, which, in turn, aids in forming
clouds and thunderstorms. This process helps explainwhy both tend to be more frequent over cities.
7. The word “pronounced ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. examined
B. relative
C. strongest
D. darkest
8. According to paragraph 6, the highest concentration
of pollutants is likely to be found
A. in the center of the city
B. over industrial areas outside the city
C. in rural areas downwind of the city
D. high in the atmosphere during daylight hours
On clear still nights when the heat island is
pronounced , a small thermal low-pressure area forms
over the city. Sometimes a light breeze —called a
country breeze —blows from the countryside into the
city.
If there are major industrial areas along the
outskirts, pollutants are carried into the heat of town,
where they tend to concentrate. Such an event is
especially probable if vertical mixing and dispersion of
pollutants are inhibited. Pollutants from urban areas
may even affect the weather downwind from them.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
The resulting difference in atmosphere pressure between the city and the countryside can
cause air to shift.
Where would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Cities are generally warmer than the surrounding countryside, a phenomenon known as the urban heat
island.
Answer Choices
A. In the countryside, much solar energy is used in evaporation, but in the city this energy builds up as heat.
B. Increased industrial and urban development has also increased average levels of humidity over the last
century.
C. Pollution from cars and factories helps increase the amounts of fog and precipitation that occur in cities.
D. The urban heat island is strongest in the summer, when the days are long and the sunlight is intense.
E. Heat and air are trapped in the irregular spaces between buildings, which creates the atmospheric
conditions that result in storms and winds.
F. Country breezes blow pollutants put from the cities into the surrounding countryside.
TPO49
TPO49-1 Ancient Coastlines
1. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.In the last few centuries, the erosion of coastline
created the Neolithic stone circle in Brittany, France,
at the same time that it destroyed the medieval
villages in Yorkshire, England.
B.Coastlines have changed even in recent times as
shown by the current locations of certain Neolithic
monuments and medieval villages.
C.Recent changes in the coastlines near the Neolithic
stone circle of Er Lannic in Brittany, France, and the
medieval villages in Yorkshire, England, suggest that
ancient coastlines changed in similar ways.
D.Changes in coastlines can lead to the creation of
islands such as Er Lannic in France or the total erosion
of cliffs as in Yorkshire in England, though no
considerable changes have occurred in recent periods
2. According to paragraph 1, the city of Ephesus in
western Turkey is an example of which of the
following?
A.Recent changes in the shoreline that have resulted
in the creation of new land
B.Port cities that have lost shoreline due to the
erosion of land
C.The ocean 's role in the formation of new land
D.The importance of changes in shoreline to cities
located inland
Information on past climates is primarily of
relevance to archaeology because of what it tells us
about the effects on the land and on the resources
that people needed to survive. The most crucial effect
of climate was on the sheer quantity of land available
in each period, measurable by studying ancientcoastlines. These have changed constantly through
time, even in relatively recent periods, as can be
seen from the Neolithic stone circle of Er Lannic, in
Brittany, France (once inland but now half
submerged on an island) or medieval villages in east
Yorkshire, England, that have tumbled into the sea in
the last few centuries as the North Sea gnaws its way
westward and erodes the cliffs. Conversely, silts
deposited by rivers sometimes push the sea farther
back, creating new land, as at Ephesus in western
Turkey, a port on the coast in Roman times but today
some five kilometers inland.
3. By indicating that flora and fauna of isolated or
insular areas were often “irreversibly affected ”by the
changes due to the Ice Age, the author means that the
flora and fauna were
A.unable to return to their previous conditions
B.in a constant state of change
C.completely destroyed by human colonization
D.unevenly distributed across the area
4. According to paragraph 2, all of the following are
true of Beringia EXCEPT:
A.It may have been used by the people who first
colonized North America.
B.It may have been large enough to support life.
C.It was probably still four meters under water during
the glacial maximum.
D.It was probably a vast plain.
5. What purpose does the discussion about the Bering
Strait in paragraph 2 serve in the passage?
A.It explains the idea that changes in coastlines do not
necessarily result in significant alterations to existing
marine life.
B.It illustrates the kind of impact that variations in
land availability caused by climate change can have.
C.It provides a large amount of archaeological
evidence that casts doubt on changes in sea level
during the Paleolithic period.
D.It shows how ancient coastlines can serve as useful
models in understanding recent changes in coastlines.
Nevertheless, for archaeologists concerned with
the long periods of time of the Paleolithic period there
are variations in coastlines of much greater magnitude
to consider. The expansion and contraction of the
continental glaciers caused huge and uneven rises and
falls in sea levels worldwide. When the ice sheets
grew, the sea level would drop as water became
locked up in the glaciers; when the ice melted, the sea
level would rise again. Falls in sea level often exposed
a number of important land bridges, such as those
linking Alaska to northeast Asia and Britain to
northwest Europe, a phenomenon with far-reaching
effects not only on human colonization of the globe
but also on the environment as a whole —— the flora
and fauna of isolated or insular areas were radicallyand often irreversibly affected . Between Alaska and
Asia today lies the Bering Strait, which is so shallow
that a fall in sea level of only four meters would turn it
into a land bridge. When the ice sheets were at their
greatest extent some 18,000 years ago (the glacial
maximum), it is thought that the fall was about 120
meters, which therefore created not merely a bridge
but a vast plain, 1,000 kilometers from the north to
the south, which has been called Beringia. The
existence of Beringia (and the extent to which it could
have supported human life) is one of the crucial
pieces of evidence in the continuing debate about the
likely route and date of human colonization of the
New World.
6. According to paragraph 3, why is the height of a
raised beach not a straightforward indicator of past
sea level?
A.The height of the beach may have been raised or
altered by human interventions in the shore
environment.
B.The height of the beach may be the result of erosion
over a brief period of time.
CIt is difficult to assess if the sea actually existed at
that level for any significant period of time.
D.The surface of Earth may have shifted, moving the
beach from its original position.
7. According to paragraph 3, which of the following
causes an isostatic uplift?
A.Shifts in Earth 's crust
B.A decrease in the pressure of thick ice sheets
C.A decrease in temperature
D.Changes in sea level
8. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 4 about Tokyo Bay?
A.The coastal land currently available is smaller than it
was during the Jomon period.
B.The height of raised beaches around Tokyo Bay is a
poor indicator of ancient sea levels.
C.The water temperature in Tokyo Bay is lower at
present than it was during the Jomon period.
D.Tectonic movement during the Jomon period was
not responsible for the formation of Tokyo Bay 's
raised beaches.
The assessment of past rises and falls in sea level
requires study of submerged land surfaces off the
coast and of raised or elevated beaches on land.
Raised beaches are remnants of former coastlines at
higher levels relative to the present shoreline and
visible, for instance, along the Californian coast north
of San Francisco. The height of a raised beach above
the present shoreline, however, does not generally
give a straightforward indication of the height of a
former sea level. In the majority of cases, the beaches
lie at a higher level because the land has been raised
up through isostatic uplift or tectonic movements.
Isocratic uplift of the land occurs when the weight of
ice is removed as temperatures rise, as at the end of
an ice age; it has affected coastlines, for example, in
Scandinavia, Scotland, Alaska, and Newfoundland
during the postglacial period. Tectonic movements
involve displacements in the plates that make up
Earth's crust; Middle and Late Pleistocene raised
beaches in the Mediterranean are one instance of
such movements.
Raised beaches often consist of areas of sand,
pebbles, or dunes, sometimes containing seashells orpiles of debris comprising shells and bones of marine
animals used by humans. In Tokyo Bay, for example,
shell mounds of the Jomon period (about 10,000 to
300 B.C.E.) mark the position of the shoreline at a
time of maximum inundation by the sea (6,500-5,500
years ago), when, through tectonic movement, the
sea was three to five meters higher in relation to the
contemporary landmass of Japan than at present.
Analysis of the shells themselves has confirmed the
changes in marine topography, for it is only during the
maximum phase that subtropical species of mollusc
are present. indicating a higher water temperature.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
The location of these heaps of rubbish can be an accurate indicator of earlier coastlines.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Direction 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points.
Changes in climate have altered Earth 's coastlines and their environments.
Answer choices
A.Changing coastlines affect the total amount of land available for people to live on.
B.The expansion and contraction of glaciers caused rises and falls in sea levels all over the world and in some
areas, led to radical changes in their flora and fauna.
C.The existence of Beringia, a vast landmass that may have supported human life, is still debated by
archaeologists.
D.The climate changes that led to alterations in the coastlines of San Francisco, Scandinavia, Scotland, Alaska,
and Newfoundland isolated species that had once flourished together.
E.Raised beaches, which may contain indicators of human activity, are often the result of isostatic uplifts and
tectonic movements.
F.Because raised beaches along the Mediterranean Sea were caused by tectonic movements, they contain
abundant evidence of ancient civilizations.
TPO49-2 Background for the Industrial Revolution
The Industrial Revolution had several roots, one
of which was a commercial revolution that, beginning
as far back as the sixteenth century, accompanied
Europe's expansion overseas. Both exports and
imports showed spectacular growth, particularly in
England and France. An increasingly larger portion of
the stepped-up commercial activity was the result of
trade with overseas colonies. Imports included a
variety of new beverages, spices, and foodstuffs. At
the same time, a growing export market took
European textiles, hardware, firearms, ships, and
ships' goods around the world and brought money
flowing back. Europe's economic institutions,
particularly those in England, were strong, had wealth
available for new investment, and seemed almost to
be waiting for some technological breakthrough that
would expand their profit-making potential even
more.
That breakthrough came in Great Britain, where
several economic advantages created a climate
especially favorable to the encouragement of new
technology. One was its geographic location at the
crossroads of international trade. Internally, Britain
was endowed with easily navigable natural waterways,
which helped its trade and communication with the
world. Beginning in the 1770fs, it enjoyed a boom in
canal building, which helped make its domestic
markets more accessible. Because water
transportation was the cheapest means of carrying
goods to market, canals reduced prices and thus
increased consumer demand. Great Britain also had
rich deposits of coal that fed the factories springing up
in industrial areas and iron ore that provided the raw
material for the manufacture of railroad equipment,
tools, and a variety of industrial and consumer goods.
1. Paragraph 3 suggests that the Industrial Revolution
did not originate outside Great Britain because
A.the labor force in other countries could not as easily
relocate to cities
B.workers in other countries preferred working
independently rather than in groups
C.there was a lack of cooperation between agricultural
and cottage workers in other countries
D.governments in other countries placed limits on
economic gain
2. According to paragraph 3 and 4, British businessmen
strengthened industrial growth by
A.finding new ways to diversify European trade
B.encouraging consumers to buy luxury items
C.reinvesting the money they made in their own
businesses
D.creating a tax on internationally traded goods
3. Why does the author mention Dutch farming
methods in paragraph 5?
A.To emphasize that Great Britain was not the only
country capable of rapid agricultural progress
B.To demonstrate British resourcefulness in adopting
economically profitable agricultural reforms
C.To give an example of a European country with a
powerful peasant workforce
D.To suggest that the Dutch agricultural system was
influenced by British farming methods
Another advantage was Britain's large population
of rural, agricultural wage earners, as well as cottage
workers, who had the potential of being more mobile
than peasants of some other countries. Eventually
they found their way to the cities or mining
communities and provided the human power upon
which the Industrial Revolution was built. The British
people were also consumers; the absence of internal
tariffs, such as those that existed in France or Italy or
between the German states, made Britain the largest
free-trade area in Europe. Britain's relatively stable
government also helped create an atmosphere
conducive to industrial progress.
Great Britain's better-developed banking and
credit system also helped speed the industrial process,
as did the fact that it was the home of an impressive
array of entrepreneurs and inventors. Among them
were a large number of nonconformists whose
religious principles encouraged thrift and industry
rather than luxurious living and who tended to pour
their profits back into their businesses, thus providing
the basis for continued expansion.
A.precursor to the Industrial Revolution was a
revolution in agricultural techniques. Ideas about
agricultural reform developed first in Holland, where
as early as the mid-seventeenth century, such modern
methods as crop rotation, heavy fertilization, and
diversification were all in use. Dutch peasant farmers
were known throughout Europe for their agricultural
innovations, but as British markets and opportunities
grew, the English quickly learned from them. As early
as the seventeenth century the Dutch were helping
them drain marshes and fens where, with the help of
advanced techniques, they grew new crops. By the
mid-eighteenth century new agricultural methods as
well as selective breeding of livestock had caught on
throughout the country.
4. The word “consumed ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.wasted
B.grown
C.stored
D.eaten
5. The author uses the word “compact ”in the passage
to indicate that after the enclosure movement,
agricultural parcels would be
A.smaller
B.productive
C.convenient
D.numerous
6. Paragraph 6 suggests which of the following about
land enclosure?
A.It entered a period of steady decline after 1820.
B.It was a farming reform caused by industrialization.
C.It included a range of agricultural activities by the
eighteenth century.
D.It was primarily used to provide sheep pastures in
the sixteenth century.
7. According to paragraph 6, the growth of the
workforce in British factories was influenced by
A.the competition for jobs between established and
new city inhabitans
B.a decrease in the farming profits of large
landoweners
C.the failure of small independent farms
D.an attempt by large landowners to take control of
the cities
8. The author presents information in the passage
mainly by
A.contrasting the development of industrialism in
different countries
B.explaining a new theory about the origins of the
Industrial Revolution
C.analyzing the consequences of European
industrialism
D explaining the reasons why industrialism began in
Great Britain
Much of the increased production was consumed
by Great Britain's burgeoning population. At the same
time, people were moving to the city, partly because
of the enclosure movement; that is, the fencing of
common fields and pastures in order to provide morecompact , efficient, privately held agricultural parcels
that would produce more goods and greater profits.
In the sixteenth century enclosures were usually used
for creating sheep pastures, but by the eighteenth
century new farming techniques made it
advantageous for large landowners to seek enclosures
in order to improve agricultural production. Between
1714 and 1820 over 6 million acres of English land
were enclosed. As a result, many small, independent
farmers were forced to sell out simply because they
could not compete. Nonlandholding peasants and
cottage workers, who worked for wages and grazed
cows or pigs on the village common, were also hurt
when the common was no longer available. It was
such people who began to flock to the cities seeking
employment and who found work in the factories that
would transform the nation and, eventually, the
world.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
Cities would not only provide job opportunities but also profoundly affect social patterns, standards of living,
political movements, and ideologies.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Direction 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points.
The Industrial Revolution was the result of far-reaching economic changes in Great Britain and Europe.
Answer choices
A.The expansion of international trade from the sixteenth century on greatly stabilized the European
economy.
B.Intense consumer activity and sound government institutions enabled mechanized labor to develop in
Great Britain.
C.A thriving cottage industry was able to successfully compete with the factory system.
D.Canals in eighteenth-century Great Britain played a more important role than did railroads in increasing
internal trade.
E.British entrepreneurs invented a new system of banking that led to rapid economic growth.
F.An increasingly efficient agricultural industry freed British workers for factory employment.
TPO49-3 Movable Type
1. The word “contracted ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.translated
B.invented
C.shortened
D.borrowed
2. According to paragraph 2, all of the following were
advantages of movable metal type EXCEPT:
A.It could be reused.
B.It made letters of standardized size.
C.It did not require specialized skill to use.
D.It could easily be restored from a mold.
3. The word “rudimentary ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.primitive
B.decorative
C.practical
D.complicated
Nothing divided the medieval world in Europe more
decisively from the Early Modern period than printing
with movable type. It was a German invention and the
culmination of a complex process. The world of
antiquity had recorded its writings mainly on papyrus.
Between 200 B.C. and A.D. 300, this was
supplemented by vellum, calfskin treated and then
smoothed by pumice stone. To this in late Roman
times was added parchment, similarly made from the
smoothed skin of sheep or goats. In the early Middle
Ages, Europe imported an industrial process from
China, which turned almost any kind of fibrous
material into pulp that was then spread in sheets. This
was known as cloth parchment. By about 1150 the
Spanish had developed the first mill for making cheappaper (a word contracted from "papyrus," which
became the standard term). One of the most
important phenomena of the later Middle Ages was
the growing availability of cheap paper. Even in
England, where technology lagged far behind, a sheet
of paper, or eight octavo pages, cost only a penny by
the fifteenth century.
In the years 1446-1448, two German goldsmiths,
Johannes Gutenberg and Johann Fust, made use of
cheap paper to introduce a critical improvement in
the way written pages were reproduced. Printing from
wooden blocks was the old method; what the
Germans did was to invent movable type for the
letterpress. It had three merits: it could be used
repeatedly until worn out; it was cast in metal from a
mold and so could be renewed without difficulty; and
it made lettering uniform. In 1450, Gutenberg began
work on his Bible, the first printed book, known as the
Gutenberg. It was completed in 1455 and is a marvel.
As Gutenberg, apart from getting the key idea, had to
solve a lot of practical problems, including imposing
paper and ink into the process, and the actual printingitself, for which he adapted the screw press used by
winemakers, it is amazing that his first product does
not look at all rudimentary . Those who handle it are
struck by its
4. According to the passage, the role of the “monastic
scriptoria ”was to
A.translate old religious texts into modern languages
B.turn books printed at the new presses into luxury
items
C.produce reference works solely for religious use
D.create books of a quality that was beyond the
means of the printing industry
5. According to paragraph 3, for whom were printed
books mainly produced?
A.Scholars of language and religion
B.Buyers who could not afford to purchase
hand-copied texts
C.Artists and craftspeople
D.Monks living in monasteries
6. Why does the author mention “24 presses ”in the
discussion?
A.To indicate the extent to which the printing industry
had grown in Germany
B.To emphasize that printing presses far outnumbered
monastic scriptoria
C.To indicate the importance of trade fairs as a way of
promoting printing presses
D.To argue that the centers of printing had begun to
shift from Germany to other parts of Europeclarity
and quality.
7. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 4 about the “Gothic”typeface used in
Germany?
A.It was adopted by the Italians when they hired two
leading German printers.
B.It was more difficult to read than roman typeface.
C.It was easier to print than other styles of typeface.
DIt was widely popular with international readers.
Printing was one of those technical revolutions that
developed its own momentum at extraordinary speed.
Europe in the fifteenth century was a place where
intermediate technology —that is, workshops with
skilled craftspeople —was well established and
spreading fast, especially in Germany and Italy. Such
workshops were able to take on printing easily, and it
thus became Europe's first true industry. The process
was aided by two factors: the new demand for cheap
classical texts and the translation of the Latin Bible
into "modern" languages. Works of reference were
also in demand. Presses sprang up in several German
cities, and by 1470, Nuremberg, Germany, had
established itself as the center of the international
publishing trade, printing books from 24 presses and
distributing them at trade fairs all over western andcentral Europe. The old monastic
scriptoria —monastery workshops where monks
copied texts by hand —worked closely alongside the
new presses, continuing to produce the luxury goods
that movable-type printing could not yet supply.
Printing aimed at a cheap mass sale.
8. According to paragraphs 4 and 5, how did German
and Italian contributions to the printing industry
differ?
A.German printers originated and applied a technique
that Italian printers adapted more artistically.
B.German printers mass-produced books, while Italian
printers produced fewer books of better quality.
C.German printers used only black typeface, while
Italian printers used a variety of typeface colors and
styles.
D.German printers had greater technological skill,
while Italian printers were more commercially
successful.
Although there was no competition between
the technologies, there was rivalry between nations.
The Italians made energetic and successful efforts to
catch up with Germany. Their most successful
scriptorium quickly imported two leading German
printers to set up presses in their book-producing
shop. German printers had the disadvantage of
working with the complex typeface that the Italianssneeringly referred to as "Gothic" and that later
became known as black letter. Outside Germany,
readers found this typeface disagreeable. The
Italians, on the other hand, had a clear typeface
known as roman that became the type of the future.
Hence, although the Germans made use of the
paper revolution to introduce movable type, the
Italians went far to regain the initiative by their
artistry. By 1500 there were printing firms in 60
German cities, but there were 150 presses in Venice
alone. However, since many nations and governments
wanted their own presses, the trade quickly becameinternational. The cumulative impact of this industrial
spread was spectacular. Before printing, only the very
largest libraries, of which there were a dozen in
Europe, had as many as 600 books. The total number
of books on the entire Continent was well under
100,000. But by 1500, after only 45 years of the
printed book, there were 9 million in circulation.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage.
The typeface that followed was italic, with a slanted appearance in the style of handwriting and a name that
was recognizably Italian.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Direction 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage
or are minor ideas in the passage. This questions is worth 2 points.
The invention of movable type was an important technological development both in Europe and worldwide.
Answer choices
A.The industrial process for mass paper production was first introduced in the early fifteenth century.
B.The Gutenberg Bible was the result of combined technologies in the mass production of paper and the
newly invented manufacture of movable type.
C.The increased need for classical texts and reference books along with the existence of an established
workshop system stimulated rapid growth in the printing trade.
D.The mechanized production of books in the fifteenth century is the first instance of a modern industry in
Europe.
E.Hand-copied texts continued to be in as great demand as printed books in fifteenth-century Germany and
Italy.
F.Printed works were located primarily in libraries at the end of the fifteenth century because they were still
too expensive for mass sale.
TPO50
TPO50-1 American Railroads
1. According to paragraph 1, what effect did the
expansion of rail links have on Chicago ？
A.Chicago became the headquarters for eleven new
railroads.
B.Chicago became the most important city east of the
Mississippi River.
C.Chicago was transformed from a village into a large
city.
D.Chicago replaced eastern cities as the main buyer of
farm products from the region.
In the United States, railroads spearheaded the
second phase of the transportation revolution by
overtaking the previous importance of canals. The
mid-1800s saw a great expansion of American
railroads. The major cities east of the Mississippi River
were linked by a spiderweb of railroad tracks.
Chicago's growth illustrates the impact of these rail
links. In 1849 Chicago was a village of a few hundred
people with virtually no rail service. By 1860 it had
become a city of 100,000, served by eleven railroads.
Farmers to the north and west of Chicago no longer
had to ship their grain, livestock, and dairy products
down the Mississippi River to New Orleans; they could
now ship their products directly east. Chicago
supplanted New Orleans as the interior of America's
main commercial hub.
The east-west rail lines stimulated the settlement
and agricultural development of the Midwest. By 1860
Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin had replaced Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and New York as the leading
wheat-growing states. Enabling farmers to speed their
products to the East, railroads increased the value offarmland and promoted additional settlement. In turn,
population growth in agricultural areas triggered
industrial development in cities such as Chicago,
Davenport (lowa), and Minneapolis, for the new
settlers needed lumber for fences and houses and
mills to grind wheat into flour.
2. The author mentions “Manteno, Illinois ”in order to
A.give an example of how railroads decided which
small towns would be selected for stations
B.illustrate the power of railroads to determine where
towns would come into existence
C.explain how some railroads were able to make more
money from real estate speculation than from railroad
traffic
D.show how people 's view of the Midwest as a frontier
region had changed by the Civil War3. The word “bustling”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.commercial
B.wealthy
C.lively
D.modern
4. According to paragraph 4, how were railroads
affected by the economic depression in the late
1830s?
A.They lost important funding from state
governments.
B.They began to realize that some of their projects
were overly ambitious.
C.They had to compete with canals for government
support.
D.They emerged as the nation 's biggest business.
Railroads also propelled the growth of small
towns along their routes. The Illinois Central Railroad,
which had more track than any other railroad in 1855f
made money not only from its traffic but also from
real estate speculation. Purchasing land for stations
along its path, the Illinois Central then laid out townsaround the stations. The selection of Manteno, Illinois ,
as a stop of the Illinois Central, for example,
transformed the site from a crossroads without asingle house in 1854 into a bustling town of nearly a
thousand in I860, replete with hotels, lumberyards,
grain elevators, and gristmills. By the Civil War
(1861-1865), few thought of the railroad-linked
Midwest as a frontier region or viewed its inhabitants
as pioneers.
As the nation 's first big business, the railroads
transformed the conduct of business. During the early
1830s, railroads, like canals, depended on financial aidfrom state governments. With the onset of economic
depression in the late 1830s, however, state
governments scrapped overly ambitious railroad
projects. Convinced that railroads burdened them
with high taxes and blasted hopes, voters turned
against state aid, and in the early 1840s, several states
amended their constitutions to bar state funding for
5.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Private investment in railroads began in the 1850s
following the dramatic expansion of the railroad
network, which had been financed by local
government.
B.Railroads, relations with local governments became
strained in the 1850s, when railroads turned to private
investors for financing to expand their capacity.
C.Local governments 'limited capacity to finance
railroad expansion was a longstanding problem that
railroads solved in the 1850s by turning toward private
investment.
D.When local governments could not adequately
finance the railroads' dramatic expansion in the 1850s,
private investment became increasingly important.
6.Paragraph 5 supports which of the following ideas
about people who held railroad stock?
A.Many of them were not particularly wealthy.
B.Many of them overestimated the economic benefits
of railroads.
C.Most of them bought their stock for less than it was
worth.
D.Most of them had been employed by a railroad.railroads and canals. The federal government took up
some of the slack, but federal aid did not provide a
major stimulus to railroads before 1860. Rather, part
of the burden of finance passed to city and county
governments in agricultural areas that wanted to
attract railroads. Such municipal governments, for
example, often gave railroads rights-of-way, grants of
land for stations, and public funds.
The dramatic expansion of the railroad network
in the 1850s, however, strained the financing
capacity of local governments and required a turn
toward private investment, which had never been
absent from the picture. Well aware of the economic
benefits of railroads, individuals living near them had
long purchased railroad stock issued by governments
and had directly bought stock in railroads, often
paying by contributing their labor to building the
railroads. But the large railroads of the 1850s needed
more capital than such small investors could generate.
Gradually, the center of railroad financing shifted to
New York City, and in fact, it was the railroad boom of
the 1850s that helped make Wall Street in New York
City the nation's greatest capital market. The stocks of
all the leading railroads were traded on the floor of
the New York Stock Exchange during the 1850s. In
addition, the growth of railroads turned New York City
into the center of modern investment firms. The
investment firms evaluated the stock of railroads in
the smaller American cities and then found purchasers
for these stocks in New York City, Philadelphia, Paris,
London, Amsterdam, and Hamburg. Controlling theflow of funds to railroads, the investment bankers
began to exert influence over the railroads' internal
affairs by supervising administrative reorganizations in
times of trouble.
7. According to paragraph 5, investment bankers were
involved in all of the following EXCEPT
A.controlling the distribution of funds to railroads
B.finding national and international buyers of railroad
stock
C.overseeing administrative changes of railroads when
needed
D.persuading the federal government to reinvest in
railroads8. The word “flow”in the passage is closest in meaning
to
A.promise
B.growth
C.movement
D.source
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Indeed, the network became so dense that by the 1860s the United States had more miles of railroad tracks
than did all the rest of the world.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
The expansion of railroads in the mid-1800s played an important role in the development of the American
Midwest.
Answer choices
A.Increased rail line between the East and the Midwest resulted in the rapid rise of major Midwestern cities
such as Chicago, as well as the growth of small towns along railroad routes.
B.Once Chicago became a major commercial hub with direct rail connections to New Orleans and the East,
Midwestern farmers were no longer limited to selling most of their products locally.
C.Real estate speculation by railroads in the 1850s drove up the value of farmland and encouraged many
Midwestern farmers to sell their land and make a new life in the cities.
D.State government financing of railroads largely ended in the 1830s and was replaced by a combination of
local and federal government support and money from private investors.
E.Both canals and railroads fell out of public favor in the early 1840s, but by the mid-1850s the economic
benefits of railroads had once again become generally recognized.
F.In the 1850s railroads turned to investment banks in New York City for capital to expand and by doing so,
helped establish the city as the main financial center in the United States.
TPO50-2 The Achievement of Brazilian Independence
1. The word “anarchy”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.uncertainty
B.disorder
C.powerlessness
D.violence
In contrast to the political anarchy , economic
dislocation, and military destruction in Spanish
America, Brazil's drive toward independence from
Portugal proceeded as a relatively bloodless transition
between 1808 and 1822. The idea of Brazilian
independence first arose in the late eighteenth
century as a Brazilian reaction to the Portuguese
policy of tightening political and economic control
over the colony in the interests of the mother country.
The first significant conspiracy against Portuguese rule
was organized from 1788-1799 in the province of
Minas Gerais, where rigid governmental control over
the production and prices of gold and diamonds, as
well as heavy taxes, caused much discontent. But this
conspiracy never went beyond the stage of discussion
and was easily discovered and crushed. Other
conspiracies in the late eighteenth century as well as a
brief revolt in 1817 reflected the influence of
republican ideas over sections of the elite and even
the lower strata of urban society. All proved abortive
or were soon crushed. Were it not for an accident of
European history, the independence of Brazil might
have been long delayed.
2. According to paragraph 2, Brazil gained a significant
measure of independence early in the nineteenth
century primarily as a result of
A.the Portuguese prince 's desire to become King of
Brazil rather than King of Portugal
B.Brazil's growing industrial and financial importance
C.the flight of the Portuguese court to Rio de Janeiro
D.the Strangford Treaty with England
3. According to paragraph 2, King Joao did each of the
following for Brazil EXCEPT
A.establish a national bank
B.support Brazilian industries
C.obtain important tariff concessions from England
D.encourage trade with a wider range of nations4. The word “precipitated ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.came before
B.brought about
C.resulted from
D.slowed down
The French invasion of Portugal in 1807 followed by
the flight of the Portuguese court (sovereign and
government officers) to Rio de Janeiro brought large
benefits to Brazil. Indeed, the transfer of the court in
effect signified achievement of Brazilian independence.
The Portuguese prince and future King Joao VI opened
Brazil's ports to the trade of friendly nations,
permitted the rise of local industries, and founded the
Bank of Brazil. In 1815 he elevated Brazil to the legal
status of a kingdom coequal with Portugal. In one
sense, however, Brazil's new status signified the
substitution of one dependence for another. Freed
from Portuguese control, Brazil came under the
economic dominance of England, which obtained
major tariff concessions and other privileges by the
Strangford Treaty of 1810 between Portugal and Great
Britain. The treaty provided for the importation of
British manufactures into Brazil and the export of
Brazilian agricultural produce to Great Britain. One
result was an influx of cheap machine-made goods
that swamped the handicrafts industry of the country.
Brazilian elites took satisfaction in Brazil 's new role
and the growth of educational, cultural, and economic
opportunities for their class. But the feeling was mixed
with resentment toward the thousands of Portuguese
courtiers (officials) and hangers-on who came with the
court and who competed with Brazilians for jobs and
favors. Thus, the change in the status of Brazil
sharpened the conflict between Portuguese elites
born in Brazil and elites born in Portugal and loyal to
the Portuguese crown.
The event that precipitated the break with the
mother country was the revolution of 1820 in Portugal.
The Portuguese revolutionaries framed a liberal
constitution for the kingdom, but they were
conservative or reactionary in relation to Brazil. They
demanded the immediate return of King Joao to
Lisbon, an end to the system of dual monarchy that he
had devised, and the restoration of the Portuguesecommercial monopoly. Timid and vacillating, King Joao
did not know which way to turn. Under the pressure
of his courtiers,
5. According to paragraph 4, the Portuguese
revolutionaries insisted on each of the following
EXCEPT
A.King Joao 's immediate return to Portugal
B.the creation of a liberal constitution for Brazil
C.an end to Brazil 's status as a kingdom
D.Portuguese control over the Brazilian economy
6. In paragraph 4, why does the author mention that
King Joao 's courtiers “hungered to return to Portugal
and their lost estates ”?
A.To illustrate how conservative the couriers were
B.To help explain the position taken by the courtiers
C.To give an example of the effects produced by the
revolution
D.To show why King Joao advised his son the way he
did
7. Paragraphs 4 and 5 support the idea that Brazil 's
move to declare independence in 1822 was primarily
the result of
A.the revolutionaries 1 demand that King Joao return
to Portugal
B.Portugal 's apparent intention to return Brazil to the
status of a colony
C.King Joao 's decision to leave his son Pedro in Brazil
D.the growing threat of intervention by the Brazilian
masseswho hungered to return to Portugal and their lost
estates , he finally approved the new constitution and
sailed for Portugal. He left behind him, however, his
son and heir, Pedro, and in a private letter advised him
that in the event the Brazilians should demand
independence, he should assume leadership of the
movement and set the crown of Brazil on his head.
Soon it became clear that the Portuguese parliament
intended to set the clock back by abrogating all the
liberties and concessions won by Brazil since 1808.
One of its decrees insisted on the immediate return of
Pedro from Brazil. The pace of events moved morerapidly in 1822. On January 9, urged on by Brazilian
advisers who perceived a golden opportunity to
make an orderly transition to independence without
the intervention of the masses, Pedro refused an
order from the parliament to return to Portugal,
saying famously, "I remain." On September 7,
regarded by all Brazilians as Independence Day, he
issued the even more celebrated proclamation,
Independence or death!" In December 1822, having
overcome slight resistance by Portuguese troops, Dom
Pedro was formally proclaimed constitutional Emperor
of Brazil.
8. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.On January 9,1982, Brazil achieved independence
without any involvement by the masses when Pedro,
despite the urging of his Brazilian advisors, defied a
parliamentary order to return to Portugal.
B.Following the urging of Brazilian advisers, On
January 9,1982, the Portuguese parliament ordered
Pedro to return, but, hoping to avoid conflict with the
masses, Pedro declared, “I remain. ”
C.The best opportunity for Brazil to achieve
independence without involving the masses came on
January 9, 1822, but Pedro, saying, “I remain. ”refused
an order to return to Portugal.
D.Seeing the possibility of an orderly transition to
independence, Pedro 's Brazilian advisers urged him to
refuse to return to Portugal, and on January 9, 1822,
Pedro did refuse, declaring, “I remain.”
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Therefore, although still closely linked to Portugal, Brazil was on longer formally considered a colony.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
It was only after the Portuguese court moved to Brazil that significant progress toward Brazilian
Independence began.
Answer choices
A.Major conspiracies against Portuguese dominance developed in regions where governmental control over
Brazil's, who had no loyalties to the Portuguese crown.
B.The presence of King Joao and his court in Rio de Janeiro created competition and tension with the
Portuguese elites born in Brazil, who had no loyalties to the Portuguese crown.
C.King Joao effectively freed Brazil from Portugal 's political and economic control and in 1815 elevated Brazil
to the legal status of a kingdom coequal with Portugal.
D.After the Portuguese revolution in 1820, Portugal attempted to reestablish complete control over Brazil;
but although King Joao returned to Lisbon, Pedro, his son and heir, remained in Brazil.
E.After freeing itself from Portuguese control, Brazil almost immediately fell under the control of England,
which used its economic power to advance Brazil 's local industry for England 's benefit.
F.In 1822 Dom Pedro refused Portugal 's demand that he return, declared Brazil 's Independence, and by the
year's end had become constitutional Emperor of an independent Brazil.
TPO50-3 Star Death
1. The word “readily”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.eventually
B.easily
C.constantly
D.loosely
2. According to paragraph 1, the energy that comes
from stars and that is seen as light is the result of
A.protons combining with helium atoms
B.atoms of heavier elements smashing together
C.various particles fusing with one another
D.hydrogen atoms breaking apart
3. In paragraph 1, why does the author point out that
stars are billions of years old?
A.To establish that starlight is produced by an ongoing
process and not by a one-time event
B.To suggest that stars contract much more slowly
than was previously believed
C.To argue that shrinking cannot be the main way stars
generate energy
D.To argue that fusion in a star slows down as
quantities of heavy elements build up
Until the early- to mid-twentieth century,
scientists believed that stars generate energy by
shrinking. As stars contracted, it was thought, they
would get hotter and hotter, giving off light in the
process. This could not be the primary way that stars
shine, however. If it were, they would scarcely last a
million years, rather than the billions of years in age
that we know they are. We now know that stars are
fueled by nuclear fusion. Each time fusion takes place,
energy is released as a by-product. This energy,
expelled into space, is what we see as starlight. The
fusion process begins when two hydrogen nuclei
smash together to form a particle called the deuteron
(a combination of a positive proton and a neutralneutron). Deuterons readily combine with additional
protons to form helium. Helium, in turn, can fuse
together to form heavier elements, such as carbon. In
atypical star, merger after merger takes place until
significant quantities of heavy elements are built up.
We must distinguish, at this point, between two
different stellar types: Population I and Population II,
the latter being much older than the former. These
groups can also be distinguished by their locations.
Our galaxy, the Milky Way, is shaped like a flat disk
surrounding a central bulge. Whereas Population I
stars are found mainly in the galactic disk, Population
II stars mostly reside in the central bulge of the galaxy
and in the halo surrounding this bulge.
4. According to paragraphs 2 and 3, all of the following
are true of Population 1 stars EXCEPT
A.They contain material that was once contained in
Population 2 stars.
B.In terms of their mass, they consist primarily of
hydrogen and helium.
C.They contain elements that were formed through
the fusion of lighter ones.
D.They generally do not last as long as Population 2
stars.
5. The word “virtually”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.absolutely
B.usually
C.almost
D.as a result
Population II stars date to the early stages of the
universe. Formed when the cosmos was filled with
hydrogen and helium gases, they initially contained
virtually no heavy elements. They shine until their
fusible material is exhausted . When Population II stars
die, their material is spread out into space. Some of
this dust is eventually incorporated into newly formed
Population I stars. Though Population I stars consist
mostly of hydrogen and helium gas, they also contain
heavy elements (heavier than helium), whichcomprise about 1 or 2 percent of their mass. These
heavier materials are fused from the lighter elements
that the stars have collected. Thus, Population I stars
contain material that once belonged to stars from
previous generations. The Sun is a good example of a
Population I star.
What will happen when the Sun dies? In several billion
years, our mother star will burn much brighter. It will
expend more and more of its nuclear fuel, until little is
left of its original hydrogen. Then, at some point in the
far future, all nuclear reactions in the Sun's center will
cease.
6. According to paragraph 5, once the Sun is in its
“postnuclear ”phase, the outer zone will differ from
the inner zone in that the outer zone will
A.undergo a much less dramatic change in size
B.maintain more nearly constant temperatures
C.cease to be a site of energy-generating activity
D.still contain some amount of hydrogen
7. According to paragraph 5, which of the following
will be true about the inner core of the dying Sun?
A.It will contract, sending an energy wave through the
rest of the star.
B.It will shine with a bright red glow before it finally
shrinks and dies.
C.It will expand to hundreds of times its previous size.
D.It will shrink due to the weight of the outer
envelope.
8. Paragraph 5 supports which of the following about
the death of the Sun?
A.The Sun 's outer envelope will expand rapidly as a
result of decreasing temperatures in the outer zone.
B.The Sun will reach the released the material of its
outer envelope into space, nuclear fusion will
continue at the remaining core for a limited period.
C.After the Sun has released the material of its outer
envelope into space, nuclear fusion will continue at
the remaining core for a limited period.
D.While the outer region of the Sun expands, it
releases all its material into space.
Once the Sun passes into its "postnuclear ”phase,
it will separate effectively into two different regions:
an inner zone and an outer zone. While no more
hydrogen fuel will remain in the inner zone, there will
be a small amount left in the outer zone. Rapidly,
changes will begin to take place that will serve to tear
the Sun apart. The inner zone, its nuclear fires no
longer burning, will begin to collapse under the
influence of its own weight and will contract into a
tiny hot core, dense and dim. An opposite fate will
await the outer region, a loosely held-together ball of
gas. A shock wave caused by the inner zone's
contraction will send ripples through the dying star,
pushing the stellar exterior's material farther and
farther outward. The outer envelope will then grow
rapidly, increasing, in a short interval, hundreds of
times in size. As it expands, it will cool down by
thousands of degrees. Eventually, the Sun will become
a red giant star, cool and bright. It will be so large that
it will occupy the whole space that used to be the
Earth's orbit and so brilliant that it would be able to be
seen with the naked eye thousands of light-years away.
It will exist that way for millions of years, gradually
releasing the material of its outer envelope into space.
Finally, nothing will be left of the gaseous exterior of
the Sun; all that will remain will be the hot, white core.
The Sun will have become a white dwarf star. The core
will shrink, giving off the last of its energy, and the Sun
will finally die.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Clearly, a more plausible mechanism was needed to explain how stars generate energy.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Stars generate the energy that makes them shine as a by-product of nuclear fusion and not by shrinking, as
scientists had once believed.
Answer choices
A.The Sun is a good example of a Population 1 star because the Sun generates its energy through nuclear
fusion rather than through contraction.
B.Population 2 stars, the oldest, are form hydrogen and helium gases, and they shine until they exhaust their
fusible material.
C.In the Milky Way, Population 1 stars are found in and around the central bulge and Population 2 stars are
found in the galactic disk.
D.Population 1 stars, including the Sun, are relatively young stars that are mostly hydrogen and helium gas
but also contain heavier elements.
E.The Sun and stars like it will separate into inner cores and outer envelopes before all nuclear reactions in
the cores stop and the stars finally die.
F.The outer envelope of the Sun and stars like it will release their energy into space, and the inner cores will
become while dwarfs before they finally give off their last energy.
TPO51
TPO51-1 Memphis: United Egypt's First Capital
1. It can be inferred from paragraph 1 that one
consequence of the unification of Egypt was
A.the reduction of the strategic importance of older
centers of power.
B.the opportunity for the recently united Egypt to
become economically self-sufficient.
C.the increase in political tensions between the rulers
of Upper and Lower Egypt.
D.the reduction of Egypt 's dependence upon the Nile
for trade and communications.
The city of Memphis, located on the Nile near the
modern city of Cairo, was founded around 3100 B.C.
as the first capital of a recently united Egypt. The
choice of Memphis by Egypt's first kings reflects the
site's strategic importance. First, and most obvious,
the apex of the Nile River delta was a politically
opportune location for the state's administrative
center, standing between the united lands of Upper
and Lower Egypt and offering ready access to both
parts of the country. The older predynastic (pre-3100
B.C.) centers of power, This and Hierakonpolis, weretoo remote from the vast expanse of the delta, which
had been incorporated into the unified state. Only a
city within easy reach of both the Nile valley to the
south and the more spread out, difficult terrain to the
north could provide the necessary political control
that the rulers of early dynastic Egypt (roughly
3000-2600 B.C.) required.
2. Which of the following best describes how
paragraph 1 is organized?
A.Two simultaneous developments are described, as
well as the reasons why neither one would have
occurred without the other.
B.A hypothesis is presented, and then points in favor
of that hypothesis as well as points against it are
discussed.
C.A major event is described, and then the most
obvious effects of that event are presented.
D.A decision is described, and then one likely
motivation for that decision is presented.
3. According to paragraph 2, when did Egypt import
goods from Near East?
A.Once internal trade was fully controlled from
Memphis
B.Not until early dynastic Egypt established its
state-directed economy
C.As early as predynastic times
D.Only when local supplies of those goods had been
completely used up
4. Which of the sentences below best expresses theessential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Thus in Memphis, the rulers of the Early Dynastic
Period were ideally placed to control internal trade,
which they had to do in order to run their economy.
B.Therefore the rulers of the Early Dynastic Period
thought Memphis was the ideal location for trade with
nearby countries.
C.In short, a state-directed economy like that of the
Early Dynastic Period requires choosing a single
location to which goods can be moved-Memphis, in
this case.
D.In sum, then, a state-directed economy first
developed during Egypt 's Early Dynamic Period
because Memphis was an ideal location for controlling
trade.
The region of Memphis must have also served as
an important node for transport and communications,
even before the unification of Egypt. The region
probably acted as a conduit for much, if not all, of the
river-based trade between northern and southern
Egypt. Moreover, commodities (such as wine, precious
oils, and metals) imported from the Near East by the
royal courts of predynastic Upper Egypt would have
been channeled through the Memphis region on theirway south. In short, therefore, the site of Memphis
offered the rulers of the Early Dynastic Period an
ideal location for controlling internal trade within
their realm, an essential requirement for a
state-directed economy that depended on the
movement of goods.
Equally important for the national administration
was the ability to control communications within
Egypt. The Nile provided the easiest and quickest
artery of communication and the national capital was,
again, ideally located in this respect. Recent geological
surveys of the Memphis region have revealed much
about its topography in ancient times. It appears that
the location of Memphis may have been even more
advantageous for controlling trade, transport, andcommunications than was previously appreciated.
Surveys and drill cores have shown that the level of
the Nile floodplain has steadily risen over the last five
millenniums. When the floodplain was much lower, as
it would have been in predynastic and early dynastic
times, the outwash fans (fan-shaped deposits of
sediments) of various wadis (stream-beds or channels
that carry water only during rainy periods) would have
been much more prominent features on the east bank.
The fan associated with the Wadi Hof extended a
significant way into the Nile floodplain, forming aconstriction in the vicinity of Memphis. The valley may
have narrowed at this point to a mere three
kilometers, making it the ideal place for controlling
river traffic.
5. The word “appreciated ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.proposed
B.understood
Capproved
D.expected
6. According to paragraph 3 ，recent research into the
topography of the Memphis region in ancient times
suggests which of the following?
A.The level of the Nile floodplains was much higher in
predynastic and dynastic times than in later times.
B.The sediment deposits of wadis were not as
noticeable ·in predynastic and dynastic times than in
later times.
C.The Nile valley at the point of Memphis was
narrower in predynastic and dynastic times than it was
in later times.
D.Frequent rainy periods may have caused a
significant reduction of trade traffic during the
predynastic and dynastic times.
7. According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
NOT a reason Memphis was chosen as the capital of a
united Egypt?
A.It was at the junction of a major trade route with the
Nile valley.
BIt was near land that could be used for animal
grazing and for growing crops.
C.The nearby outwash fans led into wadis that could
be used desert trade routes.
D.Since foreign traders had settled in nearby Maadi,
trade between the two cities could be established.
Furthermore, the Memphis region seems to have
been favorably located for the control not only of
river-based trade but also of desert trade routes. The
two outwash fans in the area gave access to the
extensive wadi systems of the eastern desert. In
predynastic times, the Wadi Digla may have served as
a trade route between the Memphis region and the
Near East, to judge from the unusual concentration of
foreign artifacts found in the predynastic settlement
of Maadi. Access to, and control of, trade routes
between Egypt and the Near East seems to have been
a preoccupation of Egypt 's rulers during the period of
state formation. The desire to monopolize foreign
trade may have been one of the primary factors
behind the political unification of Egypt. The
foundation of the national capital at the junction of an
important trade route with the Nile valley is not likelyto have been accidental . Moreover, the Wadis Hof
and Digla provided the Memphis region with
accessible desert pasturage. As was the case with the
cities of Hierakonpolis and Elkab, the combination
within the same area of both desert pasturage and
alluvial arable land (land suitable for growing crops)
was a particularly attractive one for early settlement;
this combination no doubt contributed to the
prosperity of the Memphis region from early
predynastic times.
8. in paragraph 4, why does the author mention the
cities of Hierakonpolis and Elkab?
A.To give an indication of the level of prosperity that
Memphis is thought to have enjoyed from its earliest
days.
B.To compare the Memphis region to them in terms of
their similar combinations of characteristics providing
advantages for early settlement.
C.To identify the models that the founders of
Memphis followed in laying out the national capital.
D.To suggest that the combination of desert pasturage
and alluvial arable land in the same area was very
common.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
While considerations of political power and ease of administrator were decisive in choosing the location of
the new capital, the site clearly had other advantages.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage.
This question is worth 2 points.
Around 3100 B.C. Memphis was chosen for its strategic importance to be the first capital of a recently
united Egypt.
Answer Choices
A.River-based trade from northern Egypt and imported goods going south all passed through the Memphis
region, making Memphis an ideal location for controlling trade.
B.Recent geological surveys suggest that the topographical features of the Memphis region made it
particularly well-suited for controlling communications and trade.
C.The rulers of unified Egypt enjoyed a monopoly over foreign trade because all such trade was required to
go through the Wadi Digla, to which the rulers controlled all access.
D.After Memphis became the capital city, river-based trade along the Nile gained in importance, while
land-based desert trade declined in importance.
E.The Nile, despite a constriction of its valley near Memphis, was the most advantageous route for
communication and travel once the floodplain had begun to rise.
F.While the location of Memphis was agriculturally favorable, it was particularly attractive because it enabled
Egypt's rulers to control trade moving through the desert from the Near East.
TPO51-2 Surface Fluids On Venus And Earth
1. The word “modify”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.obtain
B.change
C.replace
D.absorb2. The word “drastically ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.gradually
B.permanently
C.extensively
D.possibly3. The word “prohibit”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.prevent
B.speed up
C.affect
D.encourage
4. According to paragraph 2, what is one difference
between Earth and Venus?
A.Earth has less water in its atmosphere than Venus
does.
B.Earth has a hydrologic system but Venus does not.
C.Earth is less geologically active than Venus is.
D.Earth has more carbon dioxide than Venus does.
A fluid is a substance, such as a liquid or gas, in
which the component particles (usually molecules)
can move past one another. Fluids flow easily and
conform to the shape of their containers. The geologic
processes related to the movement of fluids on a
planet's surface can completely resurface a planet
many times. These processes derive their energy from
the Sun and the gravitational forces of the planet itself.
As these fluids interact with surface materials, they
move particles about or react chemically with them tomodify or produce materials. On a solid planet with a
hydrosphere and an atmosphere, only a tiny fraction
of the planetary mass flows as surface fluids. Yet themovements of these fluids can drastically alter a
planet. Consider Venus and Earth, both terrestrial
planets with atmospheres.
Venus and Earth are commonly regarded as twin
planets but not identical twins. They are about the
same size, are composed of roughly the same mix of
materials, and may have been comparably endowed at
their beginning with carbon dioxide and water.
However, the twins evolved differently largely because
of differences in their distance from the Sun. With a
significant amount of internal heat, Venus may
continue to be geologically active with volcanoes,
rifting, and folding. However, it lacks any sign of a
hydrologic system (water circulation and distribution):
there are no streams, lakes oceans or
5. According to paragraph 2, all of the following played
a role in keeping carbon dioxide levels high in the
atmosphere of Venus EXCEPT
A.the breaking apart of water molecules by ultraviolet
rays
B.the evaporation of water released from the planet 's
interior
C.the escape of hydrogen into space
D.the release of molecules from melting metals such
as lead
6. According to paragraph 3, Earth 's surface is
different from the surface of many other planetary
bodies in which of the following ways?
A.It is more strongly marked by river valleys and
erosion.
B.It is more geologically active.
C.It is covered by impact craters.
D.It has an atmosphere.glaciers. Space probes suggest that Venus may have
started with as much water as Earth, but it was unable
to keep its water in liquid form. Because Venus
receives more heat from the Sun, water released from
the interior evaporated and rose to the upper
atmosphere where the Sun's ultraviolet rays broke the
molecules apart. Much of the freed hydrogen escaped
into space, and Venus lost its water. Without water,
Venus became less and less like Earth and kept an
atmosphere filled with carbon dioxide. The carbon
dioxide acts as a blanket, creating an intense
greenhouse effect and driving surface temperatureshigh enough to melt lead and to prohibit the
formation of carbonate minerals. Volcanoes
continually vented more carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere. On Earth, liquid water removes carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere and combines it with
calcium, from rock weathering, to form carbonate
sedimentary rocks. Without liquid water to remove
carbon from the atmosphere, the level of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere of Venus remains high.
Like Venus, Earth is large enough to be
geologically active and for its gravitational field to hold
an atmosphere. Unlike Venus, it is just the right
distance from the Sun so that temperature ranges
allow water to exist as a liquid, a solid, and a gas.
Water is thus extremely mobile and moves rapidly
over the planet in a continuous hydrologic cycle.
Heated by the Sun, the water moves in great cycles
from the oceans to the atmosphere, over thelandscape in river systems, and ultimately back to the
oceans. As a result, Earth's surface has been
continually changed and eroded into delicate systems
of river valleys - a remarkable contrast to the surfaces
of other planetary bodies where impact craters
dominate. Few areas on Earth have been untouched
by flowing water. As a result, river valleys are the
dominant feature of its landscape. Similarly, wind
action has scoured fine particles away from large
areas, depositing them elsewhere as vast sand seas
dominated by dunes or in sheets of loess (fine-grained
soil deposits). These fluid movements are caused by
gravity flow systems energized by heat
7. According to paragraph 3, why is water able to
move so freely on Earth?
A.Earth's temperatures are such that water exists in
solid, liquid, and gas forms.
B.Earth is large enough to be geologically active and
for its gravitational field to hold an atmosphere.
C.Earth's surface allows river valleys to develop across
the landscape.
D.Earth has active winds that blow across seas and
oceans causing fluid movements.
8. Why does the author point out that on Earth “gases
in the atmosphere or water react with rocks at the
surface to form new chemical compounds”?
A.To explain why scientists believe that few areas on
Earth have been untouched by flowing water.
B.To identify one of several ways in which the
movement of fluids can affect the surface of a planet.
C.To provide evidence that fluid movements are
caused by gravity flow systems energized by the Sun.
D.To identify an effect of wind scouring fine particles
away from large areas.from the Sun. Other geologic changes occur when the
gases in the atmosphere or water react with rocks at
the surface to form new chemical compounds with
different properties. An important example of this
process was the removal of most of Earths carbon
dioxide from its atmosphere to form carbonate rocks.
However, if Earth were a little closer to the Sun, its
oceans would evaporate; if it were farther from the
Sun, the oceans would freeze solid. Because liquid
water was present, self-replicating molecules of
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen developed life early in
Earth's history and have radically modified its surface,
blanketing huge parts of the continents with
greenery. Life thrives on this planet, and it helped
create the planet's oxygen- and nitrogen-rich
atmosphere and moderate temperatures.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Venus may not have always been this way.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage.
This question is worth 2 points.
Over time, the movement of surface fluids has greatly changed Venus and Earth.
Answer Choices
A.Although Venus is about the same size as Earth, its greater volcanic activity has added considerably to
carbon dioxide levels in its atmosphere.
B.Like Venus Earth has an atmosphere, but Earth 's atmosphere has far more oxygen and nitrogen than does
the atmosphere of Venus.
C.On Earth, chemical reactions involving fluids remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere by giving rise to
carbonate rocks, and winds energized by gravity flow systems move fine particles from one place to another.
D.Because Venus lost the water It originally had, most of its carbon dioxide remained in its atmosphere,
causing the planet to become very warm.
E.On Earth, the dominance of river valley landscapes and the existence of life are due to the planet 's
hydrologic cycle.
F.The evaporation of liquid water from Earth 's surface is largely limited by the life forms that developed,
particularly the vegetation.
TPO51-3 Population Growth in Nineteenth-Century Europe
1. According to paragraph 1, which of the following is
true about Europe in the nineteenth century?
A.A large increase in food production led to
industrialization.
B.Population changes occurred at the same pace in
the major regions.
C.The standard of living rose to the level of that in
most parts of the world.
D.The tremendous rise in population led to greater
agricultural output in every region.
2. According to paragraph 1, which of the following
caused the food supply to increase in most of Western
Europe during the nineteenth century?
A.Replacement of seventeenth-century farming
techniques with more modern ones
B.Improved grain harvests in most European countries
C.Reduced demand for food as a result of a decreased
population
D.Use of new land to grow crops
3. In paragraph 2, why does the author mention the
potato blight that occurred in Ireland?
A.To identify a crop that was more successful in the
United States than it was in Western Europe
B.To support a claim about regional agricultural
failures
C.To give an example of a problematic trend that had
started in the late seventeenth century.
D.To provide evidence that many countries in Europe
experienced a loss of population in the nineteenth
century
Because of industrialization, but also because of a
vast increase in agricultural output without which
industrialization would have been impossible, Western
Europeans by the latter half of the nineteenth century
enjoyed higher standards of living and longer,
healthier lives than most of the world 's peoples. In
Europe as a whole, the population rose from 188
million in 1800 to 400 million in 1900. By 1900,
virtually every area of Europe had contributed to the
tremendous surge of population, but each major
region was at a different stage of demographic
change.
Improvements in the food supply continued
trends that had started in the late seventeenth
century. New lands were put under cultivation, while
the use of crops of American origin, particularly the
potato, continued to expand. Setbacks did occur.
Regional agricultural failures were the most common
cause of economic recessions until 1850, and they
could lead to localized famine as well. A major potato
blight (disease) in 1846-1847 led to the deaths of at
least one million persons in Ireland and the emigration
of another million, and Ireland never recovered the
population levels the potato had sustained to that
point. Bad grain harvests at the same time led to
increased hardship throughout much of Europe.
4. According to paragraph 3, all of the following
factors helped the supply of food meet the needs of a
growing population EXCEPT
A.increased agricultural research in Germany
B.introduction of new crops
C.development of food-processing devices
D.agricultural programs in universities in the United
States
5. According to paragraph 4, famine became less of a
problem in Western Europe during the nineteenth
century because of
A.the decline of malnutrition
B.the construction of more food-storage facilities
C.faster means of transportation
D.improved agricultural methods in Eastern Europe
After 1850, however, the expansion of foods
more regularly kept pace with population growth,
though the poorer classes remained malnourished.
Two developments were crucial. First, the application
of science and new technology to agriculture
increased. Led by German universities, increasing
research was devoted to improving seeds, developing
chemical fertilizers, and advancing livestock. After
1861, with the development of land-grant universities
in the United States that had huge agricultural
programs, American crop-production research added
to this mix. Mechanization included the use of
horse-drawn harvesters and seed drills, many
developed initially in the United States. It also
included mechanical cream separators and other
food-processing devices that improved supply.
The second development involved industrially
based transportation. With trains and steam shipping,
it became possible to move foods to needy regions
within Western Europe quickly. Famine (as opposed to
malnutrition) became a thing of the past. Many
Western European countries, headed by Britain, began
also to import increasing amounts of food, not only
from Eastern Europe, a traditional source, but also
from the Americas, Australia, and New Zealand. Steamshipping, which improved speed and capacity , as well
as new procedures for canning and refrigerating foods
(particularly after 1870), was fundamental to these
developments.
6. According to paragraph 5, which of the following
factors led to rapid urbanization
A.The destruction of many farms due to bad harvests
B.The reduction in the amount of good-quality
farmland
C.The rise in death rates in the countryside
D.The lack of jobs in the countryside
7. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 6 about underground sewers?
A.They became common in most of Western Europe in
the 1830s.
B.They helped reduce deaths caused by disease in
cities.
C.They led to the discovery that disease could be
caused by germs.
D.They encouraged people to leave rural areas and
move to the cities.
8. Paragraph 6 mentions all of the following as factors
that contributed to the rapid decline of urban death
rates EXCEPT
A.the greater reliability of food supplies
B.improvements in sanitation
C.advances in the treatment of disease
D.provisions for inspecting houses
Europe's population growth included one
additional innovation by the nineteenth century: it
combined with rapid urbanization. More and more
Western Europeans moved from countryside to city,
and big cities grew most rapidly of all. By 1850, over
half of all the people in England lived in cities, a first in
human history. In one sense, this pattern seemsinevitable growing numbers of people pressed
available resources on the land, even when farmwork
was combined with a bit of manufacturing, so people
crowded into cities seeking work or other resources.
Traditionally, however, death rates in cities surpassed
those in the countryside by a large margin; cities had
maintained population only through steady
in-migration. Thus rapid urbanization should have
reduced overall population growth, but by the middle
of the nineteenth century this was no longer the case.
Urban death rates remained high, particularly in the
lower-class slums, but they began to decline rapidly.
The greater reliability of food supplies was a
factor in the decline of urban death rates. Even more
important were the gains in urban sanitation, as well
as measures such as inspection of housing. Reformers,
including enlightened doctors, began to study the
causes of high death rates and to urge remediation.
Even before the discovery of germs, beliefs that
disease spread by "miasmas" (noxious forms of bad air)
prompted attention to sewers and open garbage;
Edwin Chadwick led an exemplary urban crusade for
underground sewers in England in the 1830s.
Gradually, public health provisions began to cut into
customary urban mortality rates. By 1900, in some
parts of Western Europe life expectancy in the cities
began to surpass that of the rural areas. Industrial
societies had figured out ways to combine large and
growing cities with population growth, a development
that would soon spread to other parts of the world.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Such individual efforts had substantial, concrete effects on society.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage.
This question is worth 2 points.
Western Europe experienced a tremendous growth in population in the nineteenth century.
Answer Choices
A.Agricultural failures became less damaging after 1850 because of advances in science and technology as
well as improvements in the transportation and preservation of foods.
B.The development of better food-processing technologies allowed many Western European countries to
grow their own food without having to import it from other countries.
C.High death rates in the cities began to decline as food supplies became more reliable and as reformers
prompted improvements in sanitation and housing.
D.Although agricultural failures led to deaths and emigration population levels were restored within a short
time.
E.As the population in the countryside began increasing faster than the supply of food and living space,
people began moving to the cities in search of jobs and other resources.
F.The improvements in crop-growing methods created new jobs on the farms, causing people from the
overcrowded cities to move to the countryside to fill those jobs.
TPO52
TPO52-1 Stream Deposit
1. The word “curious”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.strange
B.rapid
C.seasonal
D.essential
2. According to paragraph 1, all of the following are
true of stream sorting EXCEPT
A.Most of the particles in mountain streams pile up
behind boulders and cobbles.
B.When particles of different sizes settle in a place, the
smaller ones sit atop the larger ones.
C.There are generally more large particles upstream
than downstream in a river.
D.In some situations, downstream particles are
created from rocks that eroded as they traveled
downstream.
3. According to paragraph 2, which of the
following is true about bars in streams?
A.They start forming in the stream channel and
then expand over the banks.
B.They seldom form in rivers that are used for
commercial navigation.
C.They tend to grow longer each year.
D.They often last no more than a year.
A large, swift stream or river can carry all sizes of
particles, from clay to boulders. When the current
slows down, its competence (how much it can carry)
decreases and the stream deposits the largest
particles in the streambed. If current velocity
continues to decrease - as a flood wanes, for example
- finer particles settle out on top of the large ones.
Thus, a stream sorts its sediment according to size. A
waning flood might deposit a layer of gravel, overlain
by sand and finally topped by silt and clay. Streams
also sort sediment in the downstream direction. Many
mountain streams are choked with boulders and
cobbles, but far downstream, their deltas are
composed mainly of fine silt and clay. Thisdownstream sorting is curious because stream
velocity generally increases in the downstream
direction. Competence increases with velocity, so a
river should be able to transport larger particles than
its tributaries carry. One explanation for downstream
sorting is that abrasion wears away the boulders and
cobbles to sand and silt as the sediment moves
downstream over the years. Thus, only the fine
sediment reaches the lower parts of most rivers.
A.stream deposits its sediment in three environments:
Alluvial fans and deltas form where stream gradient
(angle of incline) suddenly decreases as a stream
enters a flat plain, a lake, or the sea; floodplaindeposits accumulate on a floodplain adjacent to the
stream channel; and channel deposits form in the
stream channel itself. Bars, which are elongated
mounds of sediment, are transient features that form
in the stream channel and on the banks. They
commonly form in one year and erode the next. Rivers
used for commercial navigation must be recharged
frequently because bars shift from year to year.
Imagine a winding stream. The water on the outside
of the curve moves faster than the water on the inside.
The stream erodes its outside bank because the
4. Why does the author ask the reader to “Imagine a
winding stream ”?
A.To explain how the presence of bars changes the
speed and direction of water flow in stream
B.To explain why bars are more common than alluvial
fans or other types of sediment deposits
C.To illustrate the particular difficulties that
commercial navigation faces on many rivers
D.To help explain how point bars are formed
5. Why does the author include the information that“Glaciers grind bedrock into fine sediment, which is
carried by streams flowing from the melting ice ”？
A.To give a reason why heavily sedimented braided
streams are common in glacial environment
B.To explain why some mountain streams deposit
most of their sediment in a fan-shaped mound
C.To identify the most common source of sediment in
arid and semiarid mountainous regions
D.To help explain why glacial sediment decreases the
gradient and velocity of steep mountain streams6. The word “simultaneously ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.in many directions
B.on the surface
C.at the same time
D.in a straight linecurrent's inertia drives it into the outside bank. At
the same time, the slower water on the inside point of
the bend deposits sediment, forming a point bar. A
mid-channel bar is a sandy and gravelly deposit that
forms in the middle of a stream channel.
Most streams flow in a single channel. In contrast,
a braided stream flows in many shallow,
interconnecting channels. A braided stream forms
where more sediment is supplied to a stream than it
can carry. The stream dumps the excess sediment,
forming mid-channel bars. The bars gradually fill a
channel, forcing the stream to overflow its banks and
erode new channels. As a result, a braided streamflows simultaneously in several channels and shifts
back and forth across its floodplain. Braided streams
are common in both deserts and glacial environments
because both produce abundant sediment. A desert
yields large amounts of sediment because it has littleor no vegetation to prevent erosion. Glaciers grind
bedrock into fine sediment, which is carried by
streams flowing from the melting ice. If a steep
mountain stream flows onto a flat plain, its gradient
and velocity decrease sharply. As a result, it deposits
most of its sediment in a fan-shaped mound called an
alluvial fan. Alluvial fans are common in many arid and
semiarid mountainous regions.
7. The word “abruptly ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.noticeably
B.gradually
Csuddenly
D.slightly
8. According to paragraph 4, what is true about river
deltas?
A.They alternate between periods of spreading out
and periods of getting smaller.
B.They have both active channels and channels that
have been blocked by sediment.
C.They are typically formed by rivers that are braided
they reach the delta area.
D.They are much larger when formed in a still lake
than whenformed in the ocean.
A stream also slows abruptly where it enters the
still water of a lake or ocean. The sediment settles out
to form a nearly flat landform called a delta. Part of
the delta lies above water level, and the remainder
lies slightly below water level. Deltas are commonly
fan-shaped, resembling the Greek letter "delta" (?).
Both deltas and alluvial fans change rapidly. Sediment
fills channels (waterways), which are then abandoned
while new channels develop as in a braided stream. As
a result, a stream feeding a delta or fan splits into
many channels called distributaries. A large delta may
spread out in this manner until it covers thousands of
square kilometers. Most fans, however, are much
smaller, covering a fraction of a square kilometer to a
few square kilometers. The Mississippi River has
flowed through seven different delta channels during
the past 5,000 to 6,000 years. But in recent years,
engineers have built great systems of levees (retaining
walls) in attempts to stabilize the channels.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
If the Mississippi River were not contained by such systems, it would probably abandon its present path and
cut into the channel of a nearby river to the west.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage.
This question is worth 2 points.
Rivers can carry all sizes of particles that they deposit in characteristic ways.
Answer Choices
A.Particles tend to be largest upstream and smallest downstream, probably because water flowing
downstream erodes fine sediment from the larger particles.
B.Bars commonly shift from being point bars on a river bank to being mid-channel bars
C.Rivers that flow through arid and semiarid mountainous regions tend to form alluvial fans at bends in the
river.
D.A wide variety of deposits, including bars, alluvial fans; and deltas, are formed as a result of an increase in
the speed of the downstream current.
E.Deposits of sediment are found where flow where flow velocity decreases, and when there is excessive
sediment a stream may become braided, dividing into several channels.
F.Deltas, which are formed where streams enter lakes or the ocean, are naturally unstable landforms that can
extend over a large area.
TPO52-2 Natufian Culture
1. All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as
evidence that the Natufians may have engaged in the
growing and processing of cereals and grains EXCEPT
A.tools with a specific pattern of wear
B.the widespread presence of grinding stones
C.the presence of clay containers
D.results from the analysis of Natufian teeth2. Why does the author say that “many such tools
show signs of long, intensive use ”in connection with
Natufian agriculture ？
A.To argue that the Natufian people consumed grains
long before they included fish in their diet
B.To suggest that Natufian people could not replace
their tools frequently because they had to travel very
long distances to find grinding stones
C.To illustrate the sophistication of the Natufians in
the design of stone tools
D.To support the claim that the archaeological record
of the Natufian period shows clear evidence of
agricultural origins3. The phrase “attest to ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.symbolize
B.provide evidence of
C.are predictive of
D.coincide with
4. Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Studies of the teeth of Natufians suggest the
importance of cereals in their culture although they
still hunted and foraged.
BThe Natufians specialized in collecting cereals and
may have been in the process of domesticating certain
animals.
C.Studies of the teeth of Natufians suggest that thesepeople became hunter-foragers after they began
domesticating cereals.
D.The Natufians' s diet consisted mostly of cereals and
lacked sufficient meat.
In the archaeological record of the Natufian
period, from about 12,500 to 10,200 years ago, in the
part of the Middle East known as the Levant - roughly
east of the Mediterranean and north of the Arabian
Peninsula - we see clear evidence of agricultural
origins. The stone tools of the Natufians included
many sickle-shaped cutting blades that show a pattern
of wear characteristic of cereal harvesting. Also,
querns (hand mills) and other stone tools used for
processing grain occur in abundance at Natufian sites,and many such tools show signs of long, intensive
use. Along with the sickle blades are many grinding
stones, primarily mortars and pestles of limestone or
basalt. There is also evidence that these heavy
grinding stones were transported over long distances,
more than 30 kilometers in some cases, and this is not
something known to have been done by people of
preceding periods. Fishhooks and weights for sinkingfishing nets attest to the growing importance of fish in
the diet in some areas. Stone vessels indicate an
increased need for containers, but there is noevidence of Natufian clay working or pottery. Studies
of the teeth of Natufians also strongly suggest that
these people specialized in collecting cereals and
may have been cultivating them and in the process of
domesticating them, but they were also still
hunter-foragers who intensively hunted gazelle and
deer in more lush areas and wild goats and equids in
more arid zones.
5. Paragraph 2 suggests that compared with their
predecessors, the Natufians
A.had smaller camps
B.had more permanent settlements
C.engaged in trade less often
D.had more meat in their diets6. The word “preservative ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.something that adds flavor to food
B.something that adds nutritional value to food
C.something that keeps food fresh
D.something that increases the trade value of food
7. According to paragraph 2, the abundance of wild
cereals in the Natufian diet probably meant that the
Natufians
A.had to move their settlements more often
B.needed to supplement their diets with salt
C.found it easy to store their food supplies
D.no longer needed meat to provide essential
minerals
The Natufians had a different settlement pattern from
that of their predecessors. Some of their base camps
were far larger (over 1,000 square meters) than any of
those belonging to earlier periods, and they may have
lived in some of these camps for half the year or even
more. In some of the camps, people made
foundations and other architectural elements out of
limestone blocks. Trade in shell, obsidian, and other
commodities seems to have been on the rise, and
anthropologists suspect that the exchange of
perishables (such as skins, foodstuffs) and salt was
also on the increase. With the growing importance of
wild cereals in the diet, salt probably became for the
first time a near necessity: people who eat a lot of
meat get many essential salts from this diet, but diets
based on cereals can be deficient in salts. Salt wasprobably also important as a food preservative in
early villages.
As always, there is more to a major cultural
change than simply a shift in economics. The
Natufians made (and presumably wore) beads and
pendants in many materials, including gemstones and
marine shells that had to be imported, and it ispossible that this ornamentation actually reflects a
growing sense of ethnic identity and perhaps some
differences in personal and group status. Cleverly
carved figurines of animals, women, and other
subjects occur in many sites, and Natufian period cave
paintings have been found in Anatolia, Syria, and Iran.
More than 400 Natufian burials have been found,
most of them simple graves set in house floors. As
archaeologist Belfer-Cohen notes, these burials may
reflect an ancestor cult and a growing sense of
community
8. According to paragraph 4, which of the following
may have helped push the Natufians toward farming
as a way of life?
A.At the same time as the Natufians population was
increasing, the climate was becoming less hospitable.
B.The development of sickles and other tools made it
possible for Natufians to exploit new kinds of cereals.
C.The climate changes during the Natufian period
and produced conditions favorable to growing cereals.
D.Increasing competition from neighboring
populations may have forced Natufians to grow
cereals intensively.emotional tiesand attachment to a particular place,
and toward the end of the Natufian period, people in
this area were making a strict separation between
living quarters and burial grounds. In contrast with the
Pleistocene cultures of the Levant, Natufian culture
appears to have experienced considerable social
change.
The question of why the Natufians differed from
their predecessors in these and other ways and why
they made these first steps toward farming as a way of
life remains unclear. There were climate changes, of
course, and growing aridity and rising population
densities may have forced them to intensify the
exploitation of cereals, which in turn might have
stimulated the development of sickles and other tools
and the permanent communities that make
agriculture efficient. But precisely how these factors
interacted with others at play is poorly understood.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Further evidence of an evolving cultural complexity comes from Natufian burials.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summa ry by selecti ng the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage.
This question is worth 2 points.
The Natufians differed from their predecessors in many ways –most significantly, in their move toward
agriculture.
A.The Natufians used tools to collect and process food, but their lack of containers suggests that they rarely
had excess food to store.
B.The increase in salt in the Natufians' diet suggests that meat was becoming harder to find, perhaps because
of climate change.
C.The Natufians engaged in trade and lived in large camps in which they sometimes built permanent
structures.
D.Natufian culture developed somewhat differently in different regions, in part because of differences in the
types and amount of food available
from place to place.
E.Although their diet included meat from hunting, extensive evidence suggests that the Natufians consumed
a lot of cereals and may even have been cultivating them.
F.Natufian art, personal ornamentation, and burial sites suggest cultural changes involving an increasing
sense of ethnic identity and perhaps an ancestor cult.
TPO52-3 Early Food Production in Sub-Saharan Africa
1. According to paragraph 1, which of the following is
true of early food production by the end of the
Pleistocene?
A.In certain areas of western and central Africa, some
people were already growing root plants such as
yams.
B.The cultivation of cereal crops had already been
used effectively and widely by people living on the
fringes of ram forests.
C.Sophisticated forms of “vegeculture ”were
introduced for the first time in central and western
Africa by people from the Sahara 's southern borders.
D.The cultivation of root and tree crops replaced the
cultivation of cereal crops because of decreasing
summer rainfall in grassland areas.
2. Paragraph 2 mentions all of the following as
developments in Sub-Saharan Africa from 5000 to
3000 B.C. EXCEPT
A.The Sahara dried up.
B.Ancient Egyptian civilization started to form along
the Nile.
C.The inhabitants of the East African highlands gave up
hunting when cattle herders arrived.
D.Pastoral peoples moved through the savanna belt to
settle in the East African highlands.
3. Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 2 about the pastoral peoples in the East
African Highlands around 3300 B.C.?
A.They lived around the mountains and rarely
descended into the plains.
B.They relied on different food sources during dry
months than they did during wet months.
C.Their settlements were larger than those of pastoral
peoples in West Africa and the Sudan.
D.They obtained food from nearby hunter-gatherer
communities during wet months.
At the end of the Pleistocene (around 10,000
B.C.), the technologies of food production may have
already been employed on the fringes of the rain
forests of western and central Africa, where the
common use of such root plants as the African yam
led people to recognize the advantages of growing
their own food. The yam can easily be resprouted if
the top is replanted. This primitive form of
"vegeculture" (cultivation of root and tree crops) may
have been the economic tradition onto which the
cultivation of summer rainfall cereal crops was grafted
as it came into use south of the grassland areas on the
Sahara's southern borders.
As the Sahara dried up after 5000 B.C., pastoral
peoples (cattle herders) moved southward along
major watercourses into the savanna belt of West
Africa and the Sudan. By 3000 B.C., just as ancient
Egyptian civilization was coming into being along the
Nile, they had settled in the heart of the East African
highlands far to the south. The East African highlands
are ideal cattle country and the home today of such
famous cattle-herding peoples as the Masai. The
highlands were inhabited by hunter-gatherers living
around mountains near the plains until about 3300
B.C., when the first cattle herders appeared. These
cattle people may have moved between fixed
settlements during the wet and dry seasons, living off
hunting in the dry months and their own livestock and
agriculture during the rains.
4. The word “modest”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.small
B.strong
C.good
D.typical
5. Paragraph 3 mentions all of the following as reasons
that raising cattle in Africa was demanding EXCEPT:
A.Cattle had to drink frequently.
B.Cattle needed large areas of good-quality grazing
grass.
C.Cattle required a great deal of movement from one
season to the nest.
D.Cattle suffered from sleeping sickness after the
herds spread south.
6. According to paragraph 3, the presence of the
tsetse fly in eastern and central Africa caused which of
the following?
A.People in the sub-Saharan region began to focus
more on the cultivation of cereal crops than in
maintaining livestock.
B.Raids among neighboring cattle herders increased
dramatically.
C.Cattle herders spread south where they could graze
their stock in tsetse-fly-free areas.
D.Most hunter-gatherer groups limited their food
collection to the tsetse-fly-free areas south of the
Sahara.
As was the case elsewhere, cattle were
demanding animals in Africa. They required water at
least every 24 hours and large tracts of grazing grass if
herds of any size were to be maintained. The secret
was the careful selection of grazing land, especially in
environments where seasonal rainfall led to marked
differences in graze quality throughout the year. Evenmodest cattle herds required plenty of land and
considerable mobility. To acquire such land often
required moving herds considerable distances, even
from summer to winter pastures. At the same time,
the cattle owners had to graze their stock in
tsetse-fly-free areas The only protection against
human and animal sleeping sickness, a disease carried
by the tsetse fly, was to avoid settling or farming suchareas - a constraint severely limiting the movements
of cattle-owning farmers in eastern and central Africa.
As a result, small cattle herds spread south rapidly in
areas where they could be grazed. Long before cereal
agriculture took hold far south of the Sahara, some
hunter-gatherer groups in the savanna woodlands of
eastern and southern Africa may have acquired cattle,
and perhaps other domesticated animals, by gift
exchange or through raids on herding neighbors.
7. Paragraph 4 indicates which of the following about
shifting agriculture?
A.It allowed farmers to cultivate cereal crops without
reducing the size of their herds.
B.It allowed farmers to cultivate a variety of crops at
the same time.
C.It allowed farmers to cultivate crops with minimal
equipment and effort.
D.It enriched the soil and produced large yields of
crops over the years.
8. Which of the following best describes the
relationship of paragraph 5 to paragraph 4?
A.Both paragraph compare the effectiveness of
cereal agriculture and cattle herding as
food-production strategies in the sub-Saharan regions.
B.Paragraph 5 challenges the ideas in paragraph 4
about the relative importance of shifting agriculture in
the sub-Saharan regions.
C.Both paragraphs emphasize the idea that
agricultural practices south of the Sahara took a very
long time to develop.
D.Paragraph 5 provides further details about the
practice of shifting agriculture south of the Sahara
presented in paragraph 4.Contrary to popular belief: there is no such
phenomenon as "pure" pastoralists, a society that
subsists on its herds alone. The Saharan herders who
moved southward to escape drought were almost
certainly also cultivating sorghum, millet; and other
tropical rainfall crops. By 1500 B.C., cereal agriculture
was widespread throughout the savanna belt south of
the Sahara. Small farming communities dotted the
grasslands and forest margins of eastern West Africa,
all of them depending on what is called shifting
agriculture. This form of agriculture involved clearing
woodland, burning the felled brush over the cleared
plot, mixing the ash into the soil, and then cultivating
the prepared fields. After a few years, the soil wasexhausted, so the farmer moved on, exploiting new
woodland and leaving the abandoned fields to lie
fallow. Shifting agriculture, often called slash-and-burn,
was highly adaptive for savannarmers without plows,
for it allowed cereal farming with the minimal
expenditure of energy.
The process of clearance and burning may have
seemed haphazard to the uninformed eye, but it was
not. Except in favored areas, such as regularly
inundated floodplains: tropical Africa's soils were of
only moderate to low fertility. The art of farming was
careful soil selection, that is, knowing which soils were
light and easily cultivable, could be readily turned with
small hoes, and would maintain their fertility overseveral years' planting, for cereal crops rapidly remove
nitrogen and other nutrients from the soil. Once it had
taken hold: slash-and-burn agriculture expanded its
frontiers rapidly as village after village took up new
lands, moving forward so rapidly that one expert has
estimated it took a mere two centuries to cover 2,000
kilometers from eastern to southern Africa.
9. Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage.
Southern Africa was, however, relatively free of tsetse flies.
Where would the sentence best fit?
Click on a square [ ] to insert the sentence in the passage
10.【Directions 】An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete
the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or
are minor ideas in the passage.
This question is worth 2 points.
The technologies of food production may have already been employed by some sub-Saharan peoples by
the end of the Pleistocene.
Answer Choices
A.Food production started with the cultivation of root plants and developed to include the cultivation of
cereal crops.
B.In order to avoid human and animal sleeping
sickness, which posed a danger to herders and cattle, more and more herders took up cultivation.
C.By 1500 B.C. cereal agriculture was widespread throughout the savanna belt south of the Sahara, and
shifting agriculture was used effectively and widely by farmers.
D.Pastoralis who moved south across the Sahara to find suitable land for cattle grazing may have also
cultivated some crops for food.
E.Hunter-gatherer groups in eastern and southern Africa raided their herding neighbors to acquire cattle and
other domesticated animals.
F.Slash-and-burn agriculture was initially rejected by farmers because it was initially rejected by farmers
because it was too labor-intensive, but once the technique was improved, it expanded gradually to eastern and
southern Africa.
TPO53
TPO53-1 Evidence of the Earliest Writing
1.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.Sumerian script, the earliest known form of writing
among prehistoric writing systems, was first used on
clay tablets for accounting purposes.
B. Although the earliest Sumerians engaged in
commercial activity and practiced accounting, they
were not as literate as people in other parts of the
prehistoric world.
C.Archaeologists have discovered that literacy was
developed in several parts of the world, including
ancient Mesopotamia.
D.Archaeological detective work has revealed the
commercial accounting practices of the Sumerians of
ancient Mesopotamia and provided a written record
of their intense commercial activity.
2.According to paragraph 2, the first two-dimensional
symbols were
A.pictures of commodities drawn on clay tablets
B.images sealed inside conical or cylindrical containers
C.numbers used for keeping track of clay envelopes
D.images of tokens pressed into the clay of envelopes
Although literacy appeared independently in several
parts of the prehistoric world, the earliest evidence
of writing is the cuneiform Sumerian script on the
clay tablets of ancient Mesopotamia, which,
archaeological detective work has revealed, had its
origins in the accounting practices of commercial
activity. Researchers demonstrated that preliterate
people, to keep track of the goods they produced and
exchanged, created a system of accounting using clay
tokens as symbolic representations of their products.
Over many thousands of years, the symbols evolved
through several stages of abstraction until they
became wedge- shaped (cuneiform) signs on clay
tablets, recognizable as writing.
The original tokens (circa 8500 B.C.E.) were
three-dimensional solid shapes —tiny spheres, cones,
disks, and cylinders. A debt of six units of grain and
eight head of livestock, for example might have been
represented by six conical and eight cylindrical tokens.
To keep batches of tokens together, an innovation was
introduced (circa 3250 B. C. E.) whereby they were
sealed inside clay envelopes that could be broken
open and counted when it came time for a debt to be
repaid. But because the contents of the envelopes
could easily be forgotten, two-dimensional
representations of the three-dimensional tokens were
impressed into the surface of the envelopes before
they were sealed. Eventually, having two sets of
equivalent symbols —the internal tokens and external
markings —came to seem redundant, so the tokens
were eliminated (circa 3250-3100 B.C.E.), and only
solid clay tablets with two-dimensional symbols were
3.Which of the following can be inferred from
paragraph 3 about the difference between earlier
tokens and later tokens?
A.Later tokens were made of many different materials,
but earlier ones were made only of clay.
B.Later tokens often looked like the commodities that
they represented, but earlier ones did not.
C.Later tokens represented agricultural products, but
earlier ones represented finished products.
D.Later tokens were based on pictographs， but earlier
ones were based on naturalistic forms.
4.The word “likewise " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.probably
B.usually
C.similarly
D.apparently
5..
The word “Some ”in the passage refers to
A.evidence
B.inventors
C. Researchers
D.intellectual eliteretained. Over time, the symbols became more
numerous, varied, and abstract and came to represent
more than trade commodities, evolving eventually
into cuneiform writing.
The evolution of the symbolism is reflected in the
archaeological record first of all by the increasing
complexity of the tokens themselves. The earliest
tokens, dating from about 10,000 to 6,000 years ago,
were of only the simplest geometric shapes. But about
3500 B.C.E., more complex tokens came into common
usage, including many naturalistic forms shaped like
miniature tools, furniture, fruit, and humans. The
earlier, plain tokens were counters for agricultural
products, whereas the complex ones stood for
finished products, such as bread, oil, perfume, wool,
and rope, and for items produced in workshops, such
as metal, bracelets, types of cloth, garments, mats,
pieces of furniture, tools, and a variety of stone and
pottery vessels. The signs marked on clay tabletslikewise evolved from simple wedges, circles, ovals,
and triangles based on the plain tokens to pictographs
derived from the complex tokens.
Before this evidence came to light, the inventors of
writing were assumed by researchers to have been anintellectual elite. Some , for example, hypothesized
that writing emerged when members of the priestly
caste agreed among themselves on written signs. But
the association of the plain tokens with the first
farmers and of the complex tokens with the first
artisans —and the fact that the token-and-envelopeaccounting system invariably represented only
small-scale transactions —testifies to the relatively
modest social status of the creators of writing.
6.According to paragraph 5, all of the following
statements about the development of numerals are
true EXCEPT:
A.Numerals first developed around 3100
B.C.E.B.Numerals were created to keep records of
commodities.
C. The numeral “18”developed from the sign for
grain.
D.Accountants introduced unique numeral signs for
use with signs for commodities.
And not only of literacy, but numeracy (the
representation of quantitative concepts) as well. The
evidence of the tokens provides further confirmation
that mathematics originated in people 's desire to
keep records of flocks and other goods. Another
immensely significant step occurred around 3100
B.C.E., when Sumerian accountants extended the
token-based signs to include the first real numerals. 
Previously, units of grain had been represented by
direct one-to-one correspondence ―by repeating the
token or symbol for a unit of grain the required
number of times.  The accountants, however,
devised numeral signs distinct from commodity signs,
so that eighteen units of grain could be indicated by
preceding a single grain symbol with a symbol
denoting “18.”  Their invention of abstract
numerals and abstract counting was one of the most
revolutionary advances in the history of mathematics.
7.The word “unearthed ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A. Discovered
B.protected
C.buried
D. forgotten
8.The word “brainchild " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.symbol
B.concern
C.pride
D.invention
What was the social status of the anonymous
accountants who produced this breakthrough? The
immense volume of clay tablets unearthed in the
ruins of the Sumerian temples where the accounts
were kept suggests a social differentiation within the
scribal class, with a virtual army of lower-ranking
tabulators performing the monotonous job of tallying
commodities. We can only speculate as to how high or
low the inventors of true numerals were in the scribal
hierarchy, but it stands to reason that this laborsavinginnovation would have been the brainchild of the
lower-ranking types whose drudgery it eased.
9.look at the four squares[ ]to add the sentence to the passage.
Such a system was clearly awkward for large inventories..
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Drag your answer choices to the spaces where they
belong. To remove an answer choice, click on it.
To review the passage, click VIEW TEXT. Over a period of
thousands of years, the symbols originally used for keeping track of goods evolved into the first writing system,
Sumerian cuneiform.
A.Three-dimensional tokens used to keep track of debts of grain and livestock eventually gave way to
two-dimensional symbols on clay tablets.
B.Writing was probably developed by farmers and artisans, since the symbols were first used to keep track of
agricultural products and items produced by artisans.
C.Two separate sets of symbols were used to keep track of each accounting of goods to avoid mistakes in the
accounting when only one set of tokens or marks was used.
D.Early tokens representing three-dimensional geometric shapes show that ancient Mesopotamians invented
geometry as well as writing.
E.The inventors of numerals were probably lower-ranking accountants because they were assigned the job of
developing new methods of accounting for large inventories.
F.Symbols were first used in a direct one-to-one correspondence with the commodity being counted, but
eventually true numerals were developed.
TPO53-2 Rain Forest Soils
1.Select the TWO answer choices that, according to
paragraph 1, help explain the relatively low mineral
nutrient content of most tropical rain forest soils. To
receive credit, you must select TWO answers
A.The water in the streams flowing through tropical
rain forests generally has relatively low mineral
content.
B. The range of plants that grow in tropical rain forests
is so wide that almost every kind of mineral in the soil
gets used up.
C.The clays contained in tropical rain forest soils do
not bind mineral ions well.
D.Abundant rainfall causes minerals to leach out of
the soil.
2.According to paragraph 2, clay soils that contain
relatively low amounts of organic materials have all of
the following disadvantages for plants EXCEPT
A.poor water retention
B.poor root penetrability
C.few soil microbes
D.low levels of mineral nutrients
On viewing the lush plant growth of a tropical
rain forest, most people would conclude that the soil
beneath it is rich in nutrients. However, although
rain forest soils are highly variable, they have in
common the fact that abundant rainfall washes
mineral nutrients out of them and into streams. This
process is known as leaching. Because of rain
leaching, most tropical rain forest soils have low to
very low mineral nutrient content, in dramatic
contrast to mineral-rich grassland soils. Tropical
forest soils also often contain particular types of clays
that, unlike the mineral-binding clays of temperate
forest soils, do not bind mineral ions well. Aluminum is
the dominant cation (positively charged ion) present
in tropical soils; but plants do not require this element,
and it is moderately toxic to a wide range of plants.
Aluminum also reduces the availability of phosphorus,
an element in high demand by plants.
High moisture and temperatures speed the
growth of soil microbes that decompose organic
compounds, so tropical soils typically contain far lower
amounts of organic materials (humus) than do other
forest or grassland soils. Because organic compounds
help loosen compact clay soils, hold water, and bind
mineral nutrients, the relative lack of organic materials
in tropical soils is deleterious to plants. Plant roots
cannot penetrate far into hard clay soils, and during
dry periods, the soil cannot hold enough water to
supply plant needs. Because the concentration of
dark-colored organic materials is low in tropical soils,
they are often colored red or yellow by the presence
of iron, aluminum: and manganese oxides; when dry,
3.Paragraph 2 supports the idea that, as compared
with rain forest soils, grassland soils
A.contain a greater variety of soil microbes
B.contain less organic material
C.are able to hold more water
D.are generally lighter colored
4.Why does the author mention "Angkor Wat "?
A.To show that rain forest soils are essentially the
same today as they were many centuries ago
B.To make the point that rain forest soils have certain
advantages over other types of soils
C.To illustrate how colorful rain forest soils can
sometimes be
D.To emphasize how hard rain forest soils can become
5.Paragraph 2 suggests the idea that compared with
grassland soils, tropical rain forest soils have all of the
following characteristics EXCEPT
A.soil microbes grow more slowly
B.contain lower amounts of organic materials
C.hold less water
D.contain iron, aluminum and manganese oxidesthese soils become rock hard. The famous Cambodian
temples of Angkor Wat , which have survived for many
centuries, were constructed from blocks of such hard
rain forest soils.
Given such poor soils, how can lush tropical
forests exist? The answer is that the forest's minerals
are held in its living biomass —the trees and other
plants and the animals. In contrast to grasslands,
where a large proportion of plant biomass is produced
underground, that of tropical forests is nearly all
aboveground. Dead leaves, branches, and other plant
parts, as well as the wastes and bodies of rain forest
animals, barely reach the forest floor before they are
rapidly decayed by abundant decomposers —bacterial
and fungal. Minerals released by decay are quicklyabsorbed by multitudinous shallow, fine tree feeder
roots and stored in plant tissues. Many tropical rain
forest plants (like those in other forests) have
mycorrhizal (fungus-root) partners whose delicate
6.According to paragraph 3, the main advantage of a
closed nutrient system is that such a system
A.reduces the risk of minerals being lost through
leaching
B.ensures that all organisms in the system receive an
adequate supply of nutrients
C. increases the amount of nutrients that plant roots
can absorb from soil solutions
D.increases the speed with which nutrients are
returned to the soil
7.According to paragraph 4, why can getting enough
nitrogen be a problem for plants?
A.Because most of Earth 's nitrogen is located in the
atmosphere
B.Because plants can use the nitrogen they absorb
only if they have previously absorbed certain other
elements that are often scarce in poor soils
C.Because plants cannot absorb nitrogen that has not
been chemically combined with other elements
D.Because plants have to compete with bacteria for
available nitrogen in the soilhyphae spread through great volumes of soil, from
which they release and absorb minerals and ferry
them back to the host plant in exchange for needed
organic compounds. The fungal hyphae are able to
absorb phosphorus that plant roots could not
themselves obtain from the very dilute soil solutions,
and fungal hyphae can transfer mineral nutrients fromone forest plant to another. Consequently , tropical
rain forests typically have what are known as closed
nutrient systems, in which minerals are handed off
from one organism to another with little leaking
through to the soil. When mineral nutrients do not
spend much time in the soil, they cannot be leached
into streams. Closed nutrient systems have evolved in
response to the leaching effects of heavy tropical
rainfall. Evidence for this conclusion is that nutrient
systems are more open in the richest tropical soils and
tightest in the poorest soils.
The growth of organisms is dependent on the
availability of nutrients, none of which is more
important than nitrogen. Although there is anabundant supply of nitrogen in Earth 's atmosphere, it
cannot be absorbed by plants unless it is “fixed,”or
combined chemically with other elements to form
nitrogen compounds. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria help
tropical rain forest plants cope with the poor soils
there by supplying them with needed nitrogen. Many
species of tropical rain forest trees belong to the
legume family, which is known for associations of
nitrogen-fixing bacteria within root nodules. Also,
cycads (a type of tropical plant that resembles a palm
tree) produce special aboveground roots that harbor
nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria. By growing above the
ground, the roots are exposed to sunlight, which the
cyanobacteria require for growth. Nitrogen fixation by
free-living bacteria in tropical soils is also beneficial.
8.Paragraph 4 supports the idea that having
aboveground roots benefits cycads in which of the
following ways?
A.By increasing the growth rate of cycads' roots
through exposure to sunlight
B.By increasing the supply of usable nitrogen available
to cycads
C.By reducing the amount of nitrogen cycads require
D.By reducing cycads 'dependence on nitrogen-fixing
bacteria9.Look at the four squares [ ]to add the sentence to the passage.
In many contexts—grasslands and most other types of forest, for example —that inference would be correct..
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Drag your answer choices to the spaces where they
belong. To remove an answer choice, click on it. To review the passage, click VIEW NEXT.
Although tropical rain forest plants grow vigorously, the clay soils of tropical rain forests are very low in mineral
nutrients.
A.A.Clays with poor mineral-binding capacities plus low levels of organic compounds that result from rapid
decomposition produce compacted soils that are highly vulnerable to rain leaching.
B.Plants are able to tolerate the high levels of aluminum in tropical rain forest soils only because of bacteria and
fungi that neutralize aluminum while absorbing and transferring phosphorus.
C.Because water does not penetrate deep into tropical rain forest soils, most trees growing in such soils have
shallow feeder roots that spread over large areas in search of adequate moisture.
D.The delicate fungal hyphae that extend throughout most tropical rain forest soil help maintain soil quality by
transferring excess nutrients from plant tissues back into the soil.
E.Tropical rain forests have evolved closed nutrient systems, in which plants and their fungal partners transfer
mineral nutrients among organisms with little leaching through to the soil.
F.Nitrogen-fixing bacteria in the soil and within the roots and root nodules of many plants provide rain forest
plants with the nitrogen needed to help compensate for poor soils.
TPO53-3 Paleolithic Cave Paintings
1.According to paragraph 1, what is significant about
the paintings in the Lascaux caves?
A.They provide accurate depictions of the bulls and
other animals living in Paleolithic France.
B.They are the best available source of information
about daily life during the Paleolithic era.
C.They are some of the best surviving examples of
what was possibly one of the world's earliest artistic
movements.
D.They are the only evidence of creative expression
among Paleolithic human beings.
2.In paragraph 1, why does the author mention the
views of the philosophers of Classical Greece?
A.To show how explanations about the appearance of
cave painting during the Paleolithic have changed over
time
B.To present a theory about humans and art that may
be applicable to the Paleolithic era
C.To argue that Paleolithic paintings were created for
the joy of painting, while Classical art was created to
accurately represent the natural world
D. To demonstrate that the Greek philosophers were
the first to accurately understand Paleolithic art
3.Paragraph 2 suggests that the Lascaux cave paintings
could have been created as art for art's sake only if
which of the following were true?
A.Caves were often used as viewing places for
handiwork of all kinds.
B.Artists during the Paleolithic era were especially
accomplished.
C. Paleolithic people were able to satisfy their basic
needs fairly easily.
D.People in Paleolithic Europe learned about art from
people living in other areas.
In any investigation of the origins of art, attention
focuses on the cave paintings created in Europe during
the Paleolithic era (c. 40,000-10,000 years ago) such as
those depicting bulls and other animals in the Lascaux
cave in France. Accepting that they are the best
preserved and most visible signs of what was a global
creative explosion, how do we start to explain their
appearance? Instinctively, we may want to update the
earliest human artists by assuming that they painted
for the sheer joy of painting. The philosophers of
Classical Greece recognized it as a defining trait of
humans to "delight in works of imitation" —to enjoy
the very act and triumph of representation. If we were
close to a real lion or snake, we might feel frightened.
But a well- executed picture of a lion or snake will give
us pleasure. Why suppose that our Paleolithic
ancestors were any different?
This simple acceptance of art for art's sake has a
certain appeal. To think of Lascaux as a gallery allows
it to be a sort of special viewing place where the
handiwork of accomplished artists might be displayed.
Plausibly , daily existence in parts of Paleolithic Europe
may not have been so hard, with an abundance of
ready food and therefore the leisure time for art. The
problems with this explanation, however, are various.
In the first place, the proliferation of archaeological
discoveries —and this includes some of the world's
innumerable rock art sites that cannot be dated —
has served to emphasize a remarkably limited
repertoire of subjects. The images that recur are
those of animals. Human figures are unusual, and
when they do make
4.The word “Plausibly ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.Similarly
B.Obviously
C.Ideally
D.Possibly
5.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information.
A.The limited variety in the subjects of rock art
paintings has become increasingly evident in the many
sites discovered.
B.The limited repertoire of subjects found in rock art
has made it difficult for archaeologists to determine
when each painting was created.
C.In the first place, there is little new archaeological
information on the subject of rock art because of the
limited number of recent discoveries.
D. Because many rock art sites cannot be dated,
archaeologists have limited information about how
rock art varied from period to period.an appearance, they are rarely done with the same
attention to form accorded to the animals. If
Paleolithic artists were simply seeking to represent the
beauty of the world around them, would they not
have left a far greater range of pictures —of trees,
flowers, of the Sun and the stars?
6.The word “spectacular ”in the passage is closest
in meaning to
A.unique
B.impressive
C.isolated
D. sheltered
7.According to paragraph 3, which of the following is
true of the paintings located in the Lascaux caves?
A.They are all found in recesses that are difficult for
viewers to reach
B.They fill every nook and cranny of a large
underground gallery
C.Their location was probably more convenient for
viewers than for the artists
D.They are easier to view than cave paintings at other
locations.
A further question to the theory of art for art's
sake is posed by the high incidence of Paleolithic
images that appear not to be imitative of any reality
whatsoever. These are geometrical shapes or patterns
consisting of dots or lines. Such marks may be found
isolated or repeated over a particular surface but also
scattered across more recognizable forms. A good
example of this may be seen in the geologicallyspectacular grotto of P êche Merle, in the Lot region of
France. Here we encounter some favorite animals
from the Paleolithic repertoire —a pair of stout-bellied
horses. But over and around the horses' outlines are
multiple dark spots, daubed in disregard for the
otherwise naturalistic representation of animals. What
does such patterning imitate? There is also the factor
of location. The caves of Lascaux might conceivably
qualify as underground galleries, but many other
paintings have been found in recesses totally
unsuitable for any kind of viewing —tight nooks and
crannies that must have been awkward even for the
artists to penetrate, let alone for anyone else wanting
to see the art.
8.The word “prompted ”in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.brought about
B.interfered with
C. Increased
D. transformed
Finally, we may doubt the notion that the Upper
Paleolithic period was a paradise in which food came
readily, leaving humans ample time to amuse
themselves with art. For Europe it was still the Ice
Age.
An estimate of the basic level of sustenance
then necessary for human survival has been judged at
2200 calories per day. This consideration, combined
with the stark emphasis upon animals in the cave art,
has persuaded some archaeologists that the primary
motive behind Paleolithic images must lie with the
primary activity of Paleolithic people: hunting. 
Hunting is a skill. Tracking, stalking, chasing, and
killing the prey are difficult, sometimes dangerous
activities. What if the process could be made easier —
by art? In the early decades of the twentieth century,
AbbéHenri Breuil argued that the cave paintings were
all about “sympathetic magic. ”The artists striveddiligently to make their animal images evocative and
realistic because they were attempting to capture the
spirit of their prey. What could have prompted their
studious attention to making such naturalistic,
recognizable images? According to Breuil, the artists
may have believed that if a hunter were able to make
a true likeness of some animal, then that animal was
virtually trapped. Images, therefore, may have had the
magical capacity to confer success or luck in the hunt.
9.Look at the four squares[ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
Obtaining this level of nourishment from such a harsh environment must have consumed most of Paleolithic
people 's time and attention..
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points.
Drag your answer choices to the spaces where they
belong. To remove an answer choice, click on it.
To review the passage, click VIEW TEXT.
There are a number of arguments against the idea that Paleolithic cave paintings were created for the sheer joy of
painting
A.It is generally agreed that art as imitation arose during the age of Classical Greece
B.Paleolithic artists often chose to paint pictures that were intended to frighten people
C.People in the Paleolithic era may not have had time for art, and the placement of the paintings does not indicate
that they were meant to be looked at
D.Paleolithic artists chose to represent only a small segment of the natural world, and their paintings were not
always strict imitations of nature
E.Hunting was central to Paleolithic life, and animals are central to cave art, leading some to believe that the
paintings were created to bring luck to hunters.
F.Humans were rarely the subjects of cave paintings because it was thought that capturing the image of a hunter
would cause the hunter to be virtually trapped.
TPO54
TPO54-1 Elements of Life
1.The word " components " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.parts
B.bodies
C.combinations
D.characteristics
2.According to paragraphs 1 and 2, living cells contain
which of the following?
A.All chemical elements in the universe except lithium
B.About 25 different elements
C.About 96 percent of all known elements
D.Ninety-two naturally occurring elements
3.Why does the author provide the information that"Heavy elements are continually being
manufactured by stars and released into space by
stellar deaths "?
A.To explain how it is that the elements required for
life can be found everywhere.
B.To provide evidence
that our solar system is relatively young.
C.To argue
that some solar systems are more likely to support life
than others.
D.To explain why heavy elements have
greater mass than hydrogen and helium.
The creation of life requires a set of chemical
elements for making the components of cells. Life
on Earth uses about 25 of the 92 naturally occurring
chemical elements, although just 4 of these
elements—oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and
nitrogen—make up about 96 percent of the mass of
living organisms. Thus, a first requirement for life
might be the presence of most or all of the elements
used by life. 
Interestingly, this requirement can probably be met by
almost any world. Scientists have determined that all
chemical elements in the universe besides hydrogen
and helium (and a trace amount of lithium) were
produced by stars. These are known as heavy elements
because they are heavier than hydrogen and helium.
Although all of these heavy elements are quite rare
compared to hydrogen and helium, they are found just
about everywhere.
Heavy elements are continually being
manufactured by stars and released into space by
stellar deaths , so their amount compared to hydrogen
and helium gradually rises with time. Heavy elements
make up about 2 percent of the chemical content (by
mass) of our solar system, the other 98 percent is
hydrogen and helium. In some very old star systems,
which formed before many heavy elements were
produced, the heavy-element share may be less than0.1 percent. Nevertheless , every star system studied
has at least some amount of all the elements used by
life.
Moreover, when planetesimals —small, solid
objects formed in the early solar system that may
accumulate to become planets —condense within a
forming star system, they are inevitably made from
heavy elements because the more common
hydrogen and helium remain gaseous. Thus,
planetesimals everywhere should contain the elements
needed for life, which means that objects built from
4.Paragraph 3 suggests that which of the following
may be a difference between very old star systems and
newer star systems?
A.Older star systems are likely to have fewer planets,
moons, asteroids, and comets than newer star systems.
B.Newer star systems probably contain more hydrogen
and helium than older star systems.
C.Newer star systems probably contain more heavy
elements than older star systems.
D.The process of solar-system formation may have
been fundamentally different in older star systems than
in newer star systems.
5.The word " inevitably " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.typically
B.unsurprisingly
C.necessarily
D.naturallyplanetesimals —planets, moons, asteroids, and
comets-also contain these elements. The nature of
solar-system formation explains why Earth contains all
the elements needed for life, and it is why we expect
these elements to be present on other worlds
throughout our solar system, galaxy, and universe.
6.According to paragraph 4, which of the following is
true about possible life on other planets?
A.It cannot be based on silicon or nitrogen.
B.It could not survive on Earth.
C.It probably would not be made of elements produced
by stars.
D.It is likely to have carbon as its chemical basis.
7.The word " intact" in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.buried
B.whole
C.confined
D.active
Note that this argument does not change, even if we
allow for life very different from life on Earth. Life on
Earth is carbon based, and most biologists believe that
life elsewhere is likely to be carbon based as well.
However, we cannot absolutely rule out the possibility
of life with another chemical basis, such as silicon or
nitrogen. The set of elements (or their relative
proportions) used by life based on some other element
might be somewhat different from that used by
carbon-based life on Earth. But the elements are still
products of stars and would still be present in
planetesimals everywhere. No matter what kinds of life
we are looking for, we are likely to find the necessary
elements on almost every planet, moon, asteroid, and
comet in the universe.
A.somewhat stricter requirement is the presence of
these elements in molecules that can be used as
ready-made building blocks for life, just as early Earth
probably had an organic soup of amino acids and other
complex molecules. Earth's organic molecules likely
came from some combination of three sources:
chemical reactions in the atmosphere, chemical
reactions near deep-sea vents in the oceans, and
molecules carried to Earth by asteroids and comets.
The first two sources can occur only on worlds with
atmospheres or oceans, respectively. But the third
source should have brought similar molecules to nearly
all worlds in our solar system.
Studies of meteorites and comets suggest that organic
molecules are widespread among both asteroids and
comets. Because each body in the solar system was
repeatedly struck by asteroids and comets during the
period known as the heavy bombardment (about 4
billion years ago), each body should have received at
least some organic molecules. However, these
molecules tend to be destroyed by solar radiation on
surfaces unprotected by atmospheres. Moreover, whilethese molecules might stay intactbeneath the surface
(as they evidently do on asteroids and comets), they
probably cannot react with each other unless some
kind of liquid or gas is available to move them about.
Thus, if we limit our search to worlds on which
8.According to paragraph 6, why is life unlikely to be
found on any planet that lacks both an atmosphere and
a surface or subsurface liquid medium?
A.Organic molecules must be protected from solar
radiation by a surface layer of liquid.
B.Planets that lack both of these features are probably
too small to have been hit by many asteroids or comets
carrying organic matter.
C.Organic molecules need a liquid or gaseous
environment to bring them together so they can
interact.
D.An atmosphere is needed to protect organic
molecules from being destroyed by asteroids and
comets.organic molecules are likely to be involved in chemical
reactions, we can probably rule out any world that
lacks both an atmosphere and a surface or subsurface
liquid medium, such as water.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. Where
would the sentence best fit? Click on a square [ ]to add the sentence to the passage.
To answer the question "Could life exist on other planets?" we must first look at the necessary preconditions
for life..
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Drag your answer choices to the spaces where they
belong. To remove an answer choice, click on it To review the passage, click VIEW TEXT
A.Somewhere between 4 and 25 naturally occurring elements are necessary for life, depending on the complexity
of the organism.
B.Life is most likely to be found in the oldest star systems, where heavy elements have been continually produced
since those systems were formed.
C.Life is most likely to exist on those bodies that were not heavily bombarded with asteroids and comets during the
formation of the solar system.
D.The most common elements used by life-oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen —are also some of the most
widely distributed elements in the universe.
E.Planets, moons, asteroids, and comets are all composed of heavy elements, which means they contain the basis
for any life form, carbon based or otherwise.
F.Organic molecules are widely available, but chemical reactions among these molecules probably require either an
atmosphere or a liquid medium.
TPO54-2 Overkill of the North American Megafauna
1.The word " distinctive " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.hidden
B.characteristic
C.scattered
D.rare
2.According to paragraph 2, what suggests that human
activity played a role in the extinction of mammals
about 11,000 years ago?
A.Climate changes that would have favored human
population expansion occurred at the time of the
extinctions.
B.The presence of human hunters had caused animal
extinctions in other time periods.
C.There was a pattern of climate change earlier than
11,000 years ago that had not caused animal
extinctions.
D.Harmful climate changes 11,000 years ago would
have required humans to hunt larger numbers of
animals for food.
Thousands of years ago, in North America's past, all of
its megafauna —large mammals such as mammoths
and giant bears —disappeared. One proposed
explanation for this event is that when the first
Americans migrated over from Asia, they hunted the
megafauna to extinction.
These people, known as the
Clovis society after a site where their distinctive spear
points were first found, would have been able to use
this food source to expand their population and fill the
continent rapidly.
Yet many scientists argue against this"Pleistocene overkill" hypothesis. Modern humans
have certainly been capable of such drastic effects on
animals, but could ancient people with little more than
stone spears similarly have caused the extinction of
numerous species of animals?Thirty-five genera or
groups of species (and many individual species)
suffered extinction in North America around 11,000
B.C., soon after the appearance and expansion of
Paleo-lndians throughout the Americas (27 genera
disappeared completely, and another 8 became locally
extinct, surviving only outside North America).
Although the climate changed at the end of the
Pleistocene, warming trends had happened before. 
A.period of massive extinction of large mammals like
that seen about 11,000 years ago had not occurred
during the previous 400,000 years, despite these
changes. The only apparently significant difference
in the Americas 11,000 years ago was the presence of
human hunters of these large mammals. Was thiscoincidence or cause-and-effect?
3.Which of the sentences below best expresses the
essential information in the highlighted sentence in
the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in
important ways or leave out essential information
A.A computer model was designed to determine how
long it would have taken for a small group of hunters
to spread across North America.
B.A computer model showed that it was possible for a
small group of hunters to spread across North America
and kill off game animals in just 300 years.
C.According to a computer model, people coming into
North America 12,000 years ago had to kill game
animals in order to feed their population.
D.According to a computer model, about 12,000 years
ago conditions enabled a small group of hunters to
enter and cross North America in about 300 years.
4.Which of the following best describes the results of
the research discussed in paragraph 4?
A.Scientists used mathematical models to show that
most of the extinctions occurred in areas where
humans had recently arrived.
B.Scientists established that the main population of
North Americans who hunted lived in Canada during
the time of the megafauna extinctions.
C.Scientists used numerical models to confirm that
a small population of humans could have caused
big-game extinctions in a relatively short period of
time.
D.Scientists used statistics to prove beyond doubt
the currently accepted view that human hunters were
the main cause of the megafauna extinctions.
We do not know.
Ecologist Paul S. Martin has
championed the model that associates the extinction of
large mammals at the end of the Pleistocene withhuman predation. With researcher J. E. Mosimann,
he has co-authored a work in which a computer
model showed that in around 300 years, given the
right conditions, a small influx of hunters into
eastern Beringia 12,000 years ago could have
spread across North America in a wave and wiped
out game animals to feed their burgeoning
population.
5.Which of the following statements about Larry
Agenbroad's work is implied in the discussion in
paragraph 5?
A.Agenbroad showed that Mosimann and Martin's
estimates of the amount of time needed to drive
big-game to extinction were correct.
B.Agenbroad's maps were the first to indicate the ages
of the Clovis sites.
C.Agenbroad reinforced the idea that humans could
have caused the extinctions.
D.Agenbroad's studies of wooly mammoths led to his
discovery of Clovis sites.
10.According to paragraph 6, which of the following
statements challenges the view that hunting by humans
caused the extinctions of North American megafauna?
A.The Clovis sites that contain the remains of
mammoths were settled by humans long after the
extinctions occurred.
B.Only a few of the Clovis sites are located near
known mammoth habitats.
C.No archaeological evidence of extinctions has been
found at Clovis sites since 1982.
D.The number of mammoth remains found at Clovis
sites is smaller than would be expected if hunting by
humans had caused the extinctions.
The researchers ran the model several ways, always
beginning with a population of 100 humans in
Edmonton, in Alberta, Canada, at 11,500 years
ago.
Assuming different initial North American
big-game-animal populations (75-150 million animals)
and different population growth rates for the human
settlers (0.65%-3.5%), and varying kill rates,
Mosimann and Martin derived figures of between 279
and 1,157 years from initial contact to big-game
extinction.
Many scholars continue to support this scenario.
For
example, geologist Larry Agenbroad has mapped the
locations of dated Clovis sites alongside the
distribution of dated sites where the remains of wooly
mammoths have been found in both archaeological and
purely paleontological contexts.
These distributions
show remarkable synchronicity (occurrence at the
same time).
There are, however, many problems with this
model.
Significantly, though a few sites are quite
impressive, there really is very little archaeological
evidence to support it.
Writing in 1982, Martin himselfadmitted the paucity of evidence;for example, at that
point, the remains of only 38 individual mammoths
had been found at Clovis sites. In the years since, few
additional mammoths have been added to the list;there
are still fewer than 20 Clovis sites where the remains
of one or more mammoths have been recovered, a
minuscule proportion of the millions that necessarily
would have had to have been slaughtered within the
overkill scenario.
7..
In paragraph 7, why does the author mention that
there is abundant archaeological evidence for the
extinction of the New Zealand moa?
A.To show that extinctions occurred in areas other than
North America.
B.To challenge Martin's claim that the lack of
megafauna remains supports his model of the
megafauna extinctions.
C.To identify a country where humans were highly
skilled as hunters.
D.To help explain why it is unclear whether all large
herbivores of late Pleistocene America became extinct
after the appearance of Clovis.
8.Paragraph 7 suggests that Donald Grayson believes
which of the following about the remains at Clovis
sites and megafaunal extinctions?
A.The rapid rate of the spread of humans explains why
the extinctions also occurred at a rapid rate.
B.The lack of evidence of human-caused extinctions is
not surprising in view of the speed with which the
extinctions occurred.
C.It is likely that more evidence will be found as
dating methods improve.
D.If humans did contribute to the extinctions, much
more evidence of that would have been found by now.
Though Martin claims the lack of evidence actually
supports his model —the evidence is sparse because the
spread of humans and the extinction of animals
occurred so quickly —this argument seems weak. And
how could we ever disprove it?As archaeologist
Donald Grayson points out, in other cases where
extinction resulted from the quick spread of human
hunters—for example, the extinction of the moa, the
large flightless bird of New Zealand —archaeological
evidence in the form of remains is abundant. Grayson
has also shown that the evidence is not so clear that all
or even most of the large herbivores in late Pleistocene
America became extinct after the appearance of Clovis.
Of the 35 extinct genera, only 8 can be confidently
assigned an extinction date of between 12,000 and
10,000 years ago.
Many of the older genera, Grayson
argues, may have succumbed before 12,000 B.C., at
least half a century before the Clovis showed up in the
American West.
9.Look at the four squares [ ] to add the sentence to the passage.
One possible nonhuman cause —weather cycles —is not consistent with what scientists know about the timing of
the extinctions..
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Drag your answer choices to the spaces where they
belong. To remove an answer choice, click on it. To review the passage, click VIEW TEXTAbout 11,000 years ago,
all of North America's megafauna became extinct.
A.That the first humans migrated to North America near the same time as the extinctions of the megafauna has led
many to believe that hunting by humans was a significant cause of those extinctions.
B.Support for the hypothesis that hunting by humans caused the extinctions has been provided by computer models,
as well as by the discovery of some mammoths' remains near human settlements.
C.There is more evidence that human settlers hunted large flightless birds like the moa into extinction than there is
that hunters caused the extinction of large mammals like the mammoth.
D.Early North Americans known as the Clovis society developed spears in order to hunt enough large animals to
feed their population as it expanded across vast areas of the continent.
E.Scientists have proven that the human hunters of large animals who migrated across North America grew in
number so quickly that they killed off most of the megafauna within a few hundred years.
F.Some scholars argue that the evidence linking mammoth remains to human settlements is insufficient to establish
that hunting by humans was a significant factor in the megafauna extinctions.
TPO54-3 The Commercialization of Lumber
1.What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about timber
in America before the year 1860?
A.Farmers of the American West earned most of their
income by selling timber to newly arrived settlers.
B.Timber came primarily from farmers who wished to
supplement their income.
C.Timber was much more expensive before the year
1860 because it was less readily available.
D.Timber came primarily from large manufacturing
companies in the East.
In nineteenth-century America, practically everything
that was built involved wood.
Pine was especially
attractive for building purposes.
It is durable and
strong, yet soft enough to be easily worked with even
the simplest of hand tools.
It also floats nicely on water,
which allowed it to be transported to distant markets
across the nation.
The central and northern reaches of
the Great Lakes states —Michigan, Wisconsin, and
Minnesota —all contained extensive pine forests as
well as many large rivers for floating logs into the
Great Lakes, from where they were transported
nationwide.
By 1860, the settlement of the American West along
with timber shortages in the East converged with
ever-widening impact on the pine forests of the Great
Lakes states. Over the next 30 years, lumbering
became a full-fledged enterprise in Michigan,
Wisconsin, and Minnesota. Newly formed lumbering
corporations bought up huge tracts of pineland and set
about systematically cutting the trees. Both the
colonists and the later industrialists saw timber as acommodity , but the latter group adopted a far more
thorough and calculating approach to removing trees.
In this sense, what happened between 1860 and 1890
represented a significant break with the past. No longer
were farmers in search of extra income the main source
for shingles, firewood, and other wood products. By
the 1870s, farmers and city dwellers alike purchased
forest products from large manufacturing companies
located in the Great Lakes states rather than chopping
wood themselves or buying it locally.
2.Why does the author discuss the " British-invented
band saw "?
A.To give an example of how steam power led to
technological advancements
B.To help explain how the thickness of a saw blade
determines how much wood is wasted
C.To explain how competition with other countries
benefited the American lumber industry
D.To illustrate the impact of new technology on the
lumber industry3.The phrase " allowing for " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.encouraging
B.introducing
C.making possible
D.emphasizing4.The word " facilitate " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.expand
B.ease
C.transform
D.permit
The commercialization of lumbering was in part the
product of technological change. The early, thick saw
blades tended to waste a large quantity of wood, with
perhaps as much as a third of the log left behind on the
floor as sawdust or scrap. In the 1870s, however, the
British-invented band saw , with its thinner blade,
became standard issue in the Great Lakes states'
lumber factories.
Meanwhile, the rise of steam-poweredmills streamlined production by allowing for the more
efficient, centralized, and continuous cutting of lumber.
Steam helped to automate a variety of tasks, from
cutting to the carrying away of waste. Mills also
employed steam to heat log ponds, preventing them
from freezing and making possible year-round lumber
production.
For industrial lumbering to succeed, a way had to be
found to neutralize the effects of the seasons on
production. Traditionally, cutting took place in the
winter, when snow and ice made it easier to drag logs
on sleds or sleighs to the banks of streams. Once the
streams and lakes thawed, workers rafted the logs to
mills, where they were cut into lumber in the summer.
If nature did not cooperate —if the winter proved dry
and warm, if the spring thaw was delayed —production
would suffer. To counter the effects of climate on
lumber production, loggers experimented with a
variety of techniques for transporting trees out of the
woods.
In the 1870s, loggers in the Great Lakes
states began sprinkling water on sleigh roads, giving
5.According to paragraph 4, how could a warm, dry
winter interfere with lumber production?
A.Certain trees would become dry and yield
low-quality lumber.
B.There would not be enough water in streams and
lakes to raft the logs to mills.
C.It would be more difficult to transport logs to
streams and lakes.
D.Rivers would not be full enough in the spring to
power mills.
6.The word " remoteness " in the passage is closest in
meaning to
A.decline
B.density
C.size
D.isolation
7.In paragraph 5, why does the author include the
information that 89 logging railroads crisscrossed
Michigan by 1887?
A.To argue that Michigan had replaced other Great
Lakes states as the center of the lumbering industry
B.To provide evidence of the growing importance of
logging railroads to the lumbering industry
C.To support the claim that Michigan winters had
become more severe in the late 1800s than they had
been earlier
D.To challenge the idea that climate discouraged the
laying of track
8.According to paragraph 6, the construction of booms
benefited the logging industry by
A.reducing the pressures placed on the northern
Midwest pinelands in the 1860s
B.reducing the length of the downstream trip to a mill
by as much as 10 miles
C.increasing the number of logs that could be floated
down a river at a single time
D.allowing logs to move downstream more quickly
and easilythem an artificial ice coating to facilitate travel.
The ice reduced the friction and allowed workers to
move larger and heavier loads. 
But all the sprinkling in the world would not save a
logger from the threat of a warm winter. Without snow
the sleigh roads turned to mud. In the 1870s, a set of
snowless winters left lumber companies to ponder
ways of liberating themselves from the seasons.
Railroads were one possibility.
At first, the remoteness
of the pine forests discouraged common carriers from
laying track.
But increasing lumber prices in the late
1870s combined with periodic warm, dry winters
compelled loggers to turn to iron rails. By 1887, 89
logging railroads crisscrossed Michigan, transforming
logging from a winter activity into a year-round one.
Once the logs arrived at a river, the trip downstream to
a mill could be a long and tortuous one.
Logjams
(buildups of logs that prevent logs from moving
downstream) were common —at times stretching for 10
miles—and became even more frequent as pressure on
the northern Midwest pinelands increased in the 1860s.
To help keep the logs moving efficiently, barriers
called booms (essentially a chain of floating logs) were
constructed to control the direction of the timber. By
the 1870s, lumber companies existed in all the major
logging areas of the northern Midwest.
9.Look at the four squares[ ]to add the sentence to the passage.
Some sleighs were capable of carrying over 100 tons worth of timber..
10.Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the
summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some
sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are
minor ideas in the passage. This question is worth 2 points. Drag your answer choices to the spaces where they
belong. To remove an answer choice, click on it. To review the passage, click VIEW TEXT. Increasing demands for
timber in nineteenth-century America transformed lumbering in the Great Lakes region.
A.During the nineteenth century, lumbering became a large-scale industry controlled by manufacturing companies
rather than a local enterprise controlled by farmers.
B.Technological advances, including the use of steam power, led to increased productivity, efficiency, and
commercialization of the lumbering industry.
C.Seasonal changes and severe winters made the development and laying of track for logging railroads slow and
difficult.
D.After 1860 farmers continued to be the main suppliers of new timber, but lumbering companies took over its
transport and manufacture into wood products.
E.The invention of new technology, such as band saws, allowed
American lumbering companies to make a profit by exporting surplus lumber to Britain and other countries.
F.New
methods for transporting logs to mills helped transform lumbering from a seasonal activity to a year-round activity.
