TPO1
Task 3 Did you see Paul's letter in the paper about the new sculpture?
Yeah, but it was totally unconvincing. His reasons for opposing the plan were just totally off. I am glad we 'll finally have some nice arts on campus. I'd like to shake donor 's hand and say thank you.
What do you mean the donor?
You didn't know? An anonymous donor is paying the bill for most of the sculpture.
Not the university?
No, his assumptions about who is paying for are all wrong.
Still I wonder if he has a point about the space that it will take up.
Well, you know why Paul is upset? He and his friends are always out there on the lawn right where the sculpture will be, kicking around the soccer ball. Now they 'll just have to use another part of the campus to play.
Oh, so he just does not want to have to move.
Yeah. for him, it's sculpture versus convenience.
Task 4 So let me tell you about my own experience with this when I was working for a computer company a couple of years ago. So one day a coworker and I suggested we should our computers a design makeover, make them look more up to date. Market research was showing that new customers said that they would be more interested in buying our computers if they looked cooler. Our technology was advanced but the outside design looked really old fashioned.
At first, more than half the group supported us. There were a few senior managers there though who did not support the design change. One of the senior managers said our focus has always been on technology, changing the look is an unnecessary cost. Almost immediately some of our supporters changed their minds.
Even my coworker changed his mind. When I asked him why after the meeting, he told me he did not want to make a bad impression on the senior managers. He thought that disagreeing with them might jeopardize his chances of getting a promotion by not looking like a team player. What about me? I hated to admit it, but after a few hours discussion, I started wondering if it was worthy every one 's time to argue about this. As more people sided with senior management, I started to feel like I was the only one holding up the vote.
Every one else seemed to think change wasn't necessary so I voted against my own idea in the end. So we unanimously decided to stay with the current old looking design. But this decision ended up costing us a lot of money. That same year, our competitor came up with a new design that attracted some of our customers and prevented us from profiting on potential new customers.
Task 5 Hi, Mary, how is your voluntary work going? You still involved in that after school program with the elementary school kids?
Yeah, but I have got a problem. I am supposed to be driving a bunch of them to the zoo tomorrow.
Yeah?
And I was supposed to rent a van for the trip. But I waited too long to call the rental agency to reserve one and now it turns out they do not have any vans available for tomorrow. I don't know what to do. These kids will be really disappointed if their trip gets cancelled.
Well, does not one of your friends here on campus have a car? I mean could not you borrow it for the day?
Yeah, probably, but I need to borrow two cars, or there would not be enough space for all the kids.
That is why I was going to rent a van and then I need to find somebody else to drive too. I can't drive two cars by myself.
Yeah, that is true. Well, I am sure you can probably find a volunteer. Or if you want to save yourself the trouble of hunting down as a second driver, well, what about public transportation, check the bus schedule and I think there is a bus line that goes right past the zoo.
Yeah, that is a possibility. But I don't know it might be a real challenge supervising the kids on the bus.
Sometimes they are a handful when they get excited. It is an option, though.
Task 6 Scientists have learned some interesting things about the intellectual abilities of babies. They say there is evidence that babies as young as five month old can do basic arithmetic: that they can add. Scientists think that babies know that one plus one equals two and not one, the evidence is indirect because obviously, you can not ask a five month old baby to add up some numbers for you so they devised an experiment where in this experiment a baby is shown a doll on a table. okay, so the baby looks at the doll. Then the researcher lowers a screen in front of the doll. So now the doll is hidden behind the screen. But the baby has already seen the doll and so know it is there. Well, then the researcher takes a second doll and very obviously places it behind the screen with the first one. Okay, so now you have two dolls behind the screen, right? Well ,no.
Because what the researchers did was they secretly took away one of the dolls. And then when they raised the screen back up, the baby, well, it expects to see two dolls, right? But there is only one there. And guess what? The baby is surprised. It expects two, but it only sees one. How could the researchers tell that the baby is surprised. Well, they recorded the baby 's eye movements on camera. And we know that when a baby is surprised by something, a loud noise or an unexpected flash of light maybe, it stares at where the noise or light is coming from and that is what the babies in the experiment did. They stared because a baby knows if you add one doll and one doll, you should have two dolls. So, when it sees one doll, then it stares because it is surprised.
TPO2
Task 3 I don't like the university 's plan.
Really? I 've ridden those buses and sometimes there were only a few people on the bus. It did seem like a kind of a waste.
I see your point, but I think the problem is the route out of date. It only goes to the neighborhood that have gotten too expensive for students to live in. It is ridiculous that they have not already changed route, you know, so it goes where most off-campus students live now. I bet if they did that, they'd get plenty of students riding those buses.
Well, at least they are adding more parking, it has gotten really tough to find a space.
That is the other part I do not like, actually. Cutting back the bus service and adding parking just encourage more students to drive on campus and that just adds to noise around campus and create more traffic. And that'll increase the need for more parking spaces.
Yeah, I guess I can see your point. Maybe it would be better if more students use the buses instead of driving.
Right. And the university should make it easier to do that, not harder.
Task 4 Okay, so we said that the way we interact others has an impact on our behavior. In fact, there is some interesting research to suggest that in one type of interaction, when we are being observed, specifically, when we know we are being watched as we performed some activity, we tend to increase the speed at which we perform that activity. In one study, college students were asked to each put on a pair of shoes, shoes with laces they would have to tie. Now , one group of students was told that they would be observed. The second group, hoWe'ver, didn't know they were being observed. The students who were aware that they were being watched, actually tied their shoes much faster than the students who thought their were alone. Other studies confirm the same is true, even when we are learning new activities. Let's say someone is learning a new task, for example, learning how to type. When they are conscious of being observed, they'll likely begin typing at a much faster rate than they would if they were alone. But and this is interesting, the study also showed that certain common behavior, things people typically do like making mistakes when you're learning something new. That behavior pattern will also increase. So in other words, when we are learning to type, and we know we are being watched, we all type faster but we'll also make more mistakes.
Task 5 Mary, I am so glad that I ran into you.
Oh, hello, professor Jenson.
Listen, I know it's short notice and maybe you have already made the plans for spring break, but one of my students just dropped out of the field trip to the Smithson river caves. You are next on the waiting list, so now there is room for you to come along.
You are kidding. I did not think there was a chance and well, it is a three day trip right? I agreed to spend next week helping professor Clark set up the new museum exhibition. I think she is really counting on me.
Yeah, three days. But you know, if you'd rather come on the field trip why not speak with her and see if she has any one to replace you.
Yeah, I'd hate to miss out on the caves. I 'll definitely ask professor Clark if there is someone else could help her.
You know we don't leave until Wednesday. If you still have to help out, any chance you could get the museum set up done before then.
Oh, yeah, not until Wednesday, so then, yeah, maybe that 's possible too.
Task 6 So, let's talk about money. What is money? Well, typically, people think of coins and paper bills as money. But that is using a somewhat narrow definition of the term. A broad definition is this: money is anything that people can use to make purchases with. Since many things can be used to make purchases, money can have many different forms. Certainly, coins and bills are one form of money. People exchange goods and services for coins or paper bills and they use this money these bills to obtain other goods and services. For example you might give a taxi driver five dollars to purchase a ride in his taxi. And he in turn gives the five dollar to a farmer to buy some vegetables. But as I said, coins and bills are not the only form of money under this broad definition. Some societies make use of a barter system. Basically, in a barter system, people exchange goods and services directly for other goods and services. The taxi driver, for example, might give a ride to a farmer in exchange for some vegetables. Since the vegetables are used to pay for a service, by a broad definition the vegetables are used in barter as a form of money. Now as I mentioned there is also a second, a narrower definition of money, in the United States, only coins and bills are legal tender, meaning that by law, a seller must accept them as payment. The taxi driver must accept coins or bills as payment for a taxi ride, okay? But in the U.S, the taxi driver is not required to accept vegetables in exchange for a ride. So a narrower definition of money might be whatever is legal tender in a society, whatever has to be accepted as payment.
TPO3
Task 3 Do you believe any of these? It's ridiculous.
What do you mean? Well, it is important to eat healthy food.
Sure, it is. But they are saying yogurt is better for you than an omelet or than hot cereal? I mean whether something is hot or cold, that should not be the issue. Except maybe on a really cold morning, in that case which is going to be better for you, a bowl of cold cereal or a nice warm omelet? It's obvious; there is no question.
I am not going to argue with you there And this whole thing about saving money.
What about it?
Well, they are actually going to make things worse for us, not better. Because if they start cutting back and we can't get what we want right here on campus. Well we are going to be going off campus and pay off campus prices. And you know what? That will be expensive. Even if it is only two or three mornings a week ,it can add up.
Task 4 This is a true story, from my own life. In my first year in high school, I was addicted to video games. I played them all the time, and I was not studying enough. I was failing chemistry that was my hardest class. So this was a conflict for me, because I wanted a good job when I grew up, and I believed, I knew that if you wanted a good career, you got to do well in school. But I just could not give up video games. I was completely torn.
And my solution was to change my perspective. See, the only class I was doing really badly in was chemistry, in the others, I was okay. So I asked myself if I wanted to be a chemist when I grew up. And the fact is I didn't.
I was pretty sure I wanted to be a sociologist. So, I told myself my chemistry class didn't matter, because sociologists don't really need to know chemistry. In other words, I change my understanding of what I meant to do well in school. I reinterpreted my situation. I used to think that doing well in school meant doing well in all my classes. But now I decided that succeeding in school meant only doing well in the classes that related directly to my future career. I eliminated the conflict, at least in my mind.
Task 5 Hey, Maney! What 's wrong?
Oh, I am just struggling about what to do. I won an award from the creative writing institute for a story I wrote. And...
That doesn't sound like anything is wrong.
Well, it is a huge honor to win and there is an award ceremony they've invited me to attend which I am so excited about. But, here is the frustrating, I've got a biology exam that is scheduled for the same time.
a...oh. Well, have you talked to your professor about this?
Yeah, she said I could write a five page paper instead. And I have lots of ideas and know I could do a good job. But..
But what?
Well, writing a paper will take up so much time- a lot more time than studying for and taking the exam. I have lots of other school work to deal with.
Oh, or you could have someone else receive the award for you, I mean go in your place and accept it on your behalf.
Maybe I'd still get the award and money that way.
Woo, you won money too?
Yeah, pretty cool, uhen? But any ways, my parents were really looking forward to coming and seeing me on the stage shaking hands with the institute 's president and all. I'd hate to disappoint them.
True, I am sure they are really proud.
Like I said, I am still struggling about what to do.
Task 6 In advertising, various strategies are used to persuade people to buy products. In order to sell more products, advertisers will often try to make us believe that a product will meet our needs or desires perfectly, even if it is not true. The strategies they use can be subtle.. friendly forms of persuasion that are sometimes hard to recognize. In a lot of ads, repetition is a key strategy. Research shows that repeated exposure to a message even something meaningless or untrue is enough to make people accept it or see it in a positive light. You 've all seen the car commercials on TV like the one that refers to its roomy cars over and over again, you know which one I mean. This guy is driving around and he keeps stopping to pick up different people. He picks up three of four people. And each time, the narrator says plenty of room for friends, plenty of room for family, plenty of room for everybody. The same message is repeated several times in the course of the commercial. Now the car, the car actually looks a kind of small. It is not a very big car at all. But you get the sense that it is pretty spacious. You think that the viewer will reach the logical conclusion that the slogan misrepresent the product. Instead, what usually happens is that when the statement plenty of room is repeated often enough, people are actually convinced that it is true. Um, another strategy they use is to get a celebrity to advertise a product, it turns out that we are more likely to accept an advertising claim made by somebody famous. A person we admire and find appealing, we tend to think they are trustworthy. So you might have a car commercial that features a well known race car driver. Now, it may not be a very fast car, it could even be an inexpensive vehicle with a low performance rating. But if a popular race car driver is shown driving it and saying I like my car 's fast. Then, people will believe that the car is impressive for its speed.
TPO4
Task 3 I just don't think this will work.
Why not?
Because it is not going to solve the problem. Students are busy at night, I mean we have jobs, families, clubs, social events. Most of us already have something to do every single night of the week.
I see your point, I sure couldn't fit anything into my schedule during the week. I have got swimming practice most nights.
Right. And as far as expense goes, I think they are going about it the wrong way. I mean it cost money to hire more teachers and keep the academic building open later which is a lot more expensive than just simply buy more computers.
More computers?
That's right. Computer prices have come way down the past few years. So the department won't have to spend as much now as they did in the past. Besides, the computer department classrooms, you know, the room themselves, they are actually very big. There is plenty of space to add more computers.
Task 4 Last month, my favorite uncle paid me a surprised visit. I had not seen him in many years. The door bell rang, I opened the door and there was uncle pete. Now I am sure when I saw him, I said something like uncle pete, what a surprise, how nice to see you. Anyway, my wife was standing next to me, and according to her, I wasn't really aware of this. My eyes got really wide and I broke into a huge big smile. She said I was actually jumping up and down like a little boy. Well, anyway, later that evening, uncle pete told me how very very good he felt when he saw how happy I was to see him. But compare that with this, my daughter, she is six, we were building a bird house together last week. And I was showing her how to use an hammer and a nail. And of course, stupid me, I was not being very careful, and I smashed my thumb with the hammer. Body did it hurt, I almost felt like screaming. But I didn't want to upset my daughter, so I said "don't worry, honey. It's nothing." Meanwhile, I was shaking my hand as if that would stop my thumb from hurting and my face was contorted in pain. My voice was trembling too. So even though I told my daughter I was okay, I am sure she didn't believe me. Because she kept asking me if I was okay.
Task 5 Hi, good morning, could you help me with something?
Ah, maybe, what's up?
Well, I am a first year student.
Everything going okay?
Actually no, um, it's a little embarrassing. I think left my class schedule back in my dorm.
Not a good thing to do on the first day of classes.
Yeah, so I am not sure where my class is. I think I remember it was supposed to be here in Smith Hall.
There is a computer for student use in the student center, you can go over there, look it up and check the room number, but you'd have to hurry.
En, that's not a bad idea. I could check my schedule for the whole rest of the day at the same time. I don't know where any of my other classes are either, but I don't want to be late, make a bad impression with the professor on the first day. It's actually my very first class. Introduction to psychology.
Psychology? Oh, okay, you are definitely in the right building, and if it's introduction to psychology, it's going to be a big class in which case it probably meets in a big lecture hall. There are only three lecture halls in the building, one on every floor. Just check each floor until you find yours. There is an elevator so you should be able to move fast.
Yeah, but I don't know what the professor looks like or anything. How will I know whether it is my class or not.
It'd be a sort of embarrassing, sticking my head into each lecture hall asking if I was in the right place.
Well, you might luck out and find it the first time.
Task 6 In order for art to communicate, to appeal to the emotions or the intellect, it has to combine various visual elements to express meaning, or emotion. It's really the visual components of the work, things like color, texture, shape, lines and how these elements work together, that tell us something about the work. Artists combine and manipulate these visual elements to express a message or to create a mood. Think about how a painter might use color for example, you all know from experience that different colors appeal in different ways to the senses and can convey different meanings. An artist chooses certain colors to evoke a particular mood and make powerful statements. The color red for example, is a strong color and can conjure up strong emotions, such as extreme joy or excitement or even anger. Blue on the other hand, it's considered a cool color. Blue colors tend to have a calming effect on viewers. Another visual element important to art is texture.
By texture, I mean the surface quality or feel of the work, it's smoothness or roughness or softness. Now of course in some types of arts, the texture is physical. It can actually be touched by the fingers. But in painting for example, texture can be visual. The way an artist paints certain area of the painting can create the illusion of texture, an object's smoothness, or roughness, or softness. A rough texture can evoke strong anger emotions and strength, while a smooth texture is more calming and less emotional. As I said earlier, artists often combine elements to convey a message about the work. Take a painting that, say uses a lot of strong colors like reds and oranges and uses brush strokes that are broad, wide sweeping brush strokes that suggest a rough texture. Well, these elements together can convey a wilder more chaotic emotion in the viewer then, more than, say, a painting with tiny smooth brush strokes and soft or pale colors. Artists use these visual effects and the senses they arouse to give meaning to their work.
TPO5
Task 3 Did you see that article?
Yeah, and it sounds like a great idea, it's really good for the students in that program.
Don't they cook in class anyway?
Well, yeah, they do. But my cousin was in that program a few years ago and she said that it's very different to cook for a lot of people in that kind of atmosphere than to cook for classmates.
Why is that?
Well, in class you can take your time, but cooking for more people, there is more pressure I mean you are in a rush, people are waiting, and it might be easy to make a mistake with all that stress.
Then, they'll think you are a bad chef, right?
Absolutely.
So okay, it's good practice. But what about the extra cost?
Well, look at it this way. You've eaten at some of the fancy restaurants in town, right?
Yeah, there are some great places to eat around here.
Ur...These students, they will be making fantastic meals and it's going to be cheaper than going out to one of those restaurants.
Much cheaper, actually.
So, you know, it will be worth it. The meals will be as good as the ones in those expensive restaurants.
Task 4 Nowadays, something you notice more and more is television commercials that made specifically for certain television programs. So let's say a company wants to sell a telephone. A cell phone. Now during TV shows that young people watch, you know shows with pop music or teen series, they create a commercial that emphasizes how fun the phone is. You know the phone has a bright color and they show kids having a good time with their friends. And well, the company wants the kids watching TV at this time to want to buy this phone. This phone that's made especially for them. But the same company will make a different commercial to be shown during, say, a program about business or a business news show. Now for this group of people, business people, the company will have to show how efficient their phone is. How it can handle all business easily and maybe even save money. And here is the thing, it's basically the same phone. The company has just made two different commercials to appeal to different groups of people.
Task 5 Susan, what happened to your arm?
That's my wrist, actually, I sprained it last weekend, and I'm kind of upset about it, because I am supposed to play the violin in my string quarter's big concert next week. We have been practicing for weeks and we have already sold a bunch of tickets.
I am sorry to hear that. What are you going to do?
Well, I was thinking about trying to play anyway, I mean I really don't want to let the other three group members down. Plus, the doctor said my wrist should be feeling better by then.
Oh, okay, so, problem solved, right?
Not exactly, I am worried that I am going to be out of practice. Like I haven't been able to play the violin since I sprained my wrist, what if I don't play well, I will make the rest of the group sound bad.
Why don't you get somebody else to take your place?
Well, there is only one other person I know of who could do it and that's Jim. He is a great violinist and I am sure he 'd say yes. The thing is that he is not very reliable, I mean, I am in the orchestra with him and he is always showing up late for rehearsals.
Oh, so you are not sure you can depend on him.
Exactly. And we have less than a week left to rehearse for the concert, we 'd really need him to show up on time for all of our rehearsals.
Task 6 Why do we do these things we do? What drives us to participate in certain activities? To buy a certain car, or even to choose a certain career. In other words, what motivates us to do what we do? Well, in studies of motivation, psychologists distinguish between two very different types. Our reasons for doing something, our motivations can be extrinsic, in other words, based on some kind of external reward like praise or money.
Or they can be intrinsic, meaning we engage in activity because it pleases us internally. Both create strong forces that lead us to behave in certain ways. HoWe'ver, intrinsic motivation is generally considered to be more long lasting than the other. As I said, extrinsic motivation is external, it's the desire to behave in a certain way in order to obtain some kind of external reward. A child for example, who regularly does small jobs around the house, does them not because she enjoys taking out the garbage or doing the dishes but because she knows if she does these things, she will be given a small amount of money for doing them. But how motivated will the child be to continue doing the work if her parents suddenly stop giving her money for it? With intrinsic or internal motivation, we want to do something because we enjoy it or get a sense of accomplishment from it. Most people who are internally motivated get pleasure from the activity. So they just feel good about doing it. For example, I go to the gym several times a week. I don't go because I am training for a marathon or anything, I just enjoy it. I have more energy after I exercise and I know it's good for my health. So it makes me feel good about myself. And that's what kept me going there for the past five years.
TPO6
Task 3 I totally disagree with Tim 's proposal.
Why?
Well, Oh look, Tim is my friend but he is not your typical student, he stays up late partying every night, week nights, too.
If he parties every night, no wonder he can't pay attention.
Yes, and most students aren't like that, they come to class prepared and rested and they can concentrate.
So you 're saying that the problem is really Tim.
Yes, he was in one of my classes last year, and whenever I looked at him, he was actually sleeping.
I guess if he is sleeping, he can't really know what's happening, what other people in class doing.
Right, and you want to know what does happen in that last hour of seminar? In a lot of seminars that I've been in, that's when things get interesting.
Really?
Yes, that's usually when students get really involved in their discussion and start exchanging important ideas.
And if the history department actually did what Tim suggests, well, if they did that, what would happen is you lose what might be the most worthwhile part of the seminar.
Task 4 Okay, the first kind of memory, we are all very familiar with this ,right? You probably remember what you had for dinner last night. You have a conscious memory of last night's dinner, so if I ask you what did you eat last night, you could tell me. But these other kind of memories, implicit memories. They work differently.
Let's take an example from the world of advertising. When you are driving along a highway, you'll see plenty of billboards, you know, roadside advertisements. You certainly don't remember them all. But they still affect you. Marketing researchers have shown, well, to be specific, let's say there is a billboard on the highway advertising a car, called the panther, the ad shows a big picture of a car. And above the car in huge letters, is the name of the car, panther. A lot of people drive by the billboard, but ask those drivers later if they saw any advertisements for cars and well, they will think about it and a lot of them will say no. They honestly don't remember seeing any, they have no conscious memory of the panther billboard. So you ask the same people a different question. You ask okay, you ask them to name an animal, starting with the letter P . What do you think they will answer? Do they say pig? Pig is the most common animal that starts with the letter P . But they don't say pig, they say panther. The billboard had an effect even though the drivers don't remember ever seeing it.
Task 5 Hi, Sara, to what do I owe the pleasure of this office visit?
It's my study group, professor Wilson. We are not getting much studying done and you know none of us did very well on your last quiz.
En, what's the problem?
Well, we've all become good friends, and we joke around a lot instead of studying.
En, Sara, let me ask you this, when do you meet?
Every Friday afternoon.
Have you thought about changing to another day? By the time Friday afternoon, rolls around, all of you are probably exhausted and all you want to do is relax and unwind. It's hard to stay focused at the very end of the week.
Good point. Although things have gotten so out of hand that I am not sure changing days would help. And we'd lose one or two people if we change days. Friday afternoon is the only time everyone is available. But it's worth considering.
Okay, but just a second. Another possibility is, does your group have a leader?
No.
Well, if you had a leader, that would help enormously. Someone decide agenda in advance, e-mail it to every one before the meeting and then make sure that when you meet that you stay focused on your goals.
And since you seem to be concerned enough about the problem to have come and seen me. I think that someone might be you.
I guess I could take on that role. But it sounds like work.
You don't have to do it for the whole semester, Sara, you can start it off and then perhaps someone else can take over.
Task 6 One of the hardest parts of teaching is keeping your students' attention. Now, the key to doing this is understanding the concept of attention. Basically, there are two types of attention. The first type is active, active attention is voluntary. It's when you intentionally make yourself focus on something. And since it requires effort, it's hard to keep up for a long time. Okay, so let's say you are teaching a biology class, and today 's topic is frogs. All right. You're standing at the front of the room and lecturing, a frog is a type of animal known as an amphibian. Well, this is not necessarily going to keep the students' interest. But most of them will force themselves to pay active attention to your lecture. But it's only a matter of time before they get distracted. Now the other type of attention is passive attention, when it's involuntary. Passive attention requires no effort, because it happens naturally, if something is really interesting, students don't have to force themselves to pay attention to it. They do it without even thinking about it. So back to our biology lecture, you start talking about frogs and then you pull a live frog out of your brief case. You're describing it while you hold it up, show the students how long its legs are and how they are used for jumping for example.
Then maybe you will even let the frog jump around a bit on the desk or the floor. In this case, by doing something unexpected, something more engaging, you can tap into their passive attention. And it can last much longer than active attention. As long as the frog is still there, your students will be interested.
TPO7
Task 3 Everything all right?
Yeah, I am just upset about that article I showed you this morning.
Why？What's the big deal?
Well, as an art major, I think it's a big loss for the department. The university's got it all wrong.
What do you mean?
Well, the low enrollment isn't because art majors don't want to take these classes. Problem is who has time to take them when there are so many other requirements.
I don't understand.
See, the classes they are eliminating are all optional. The required courses are mostly are painting or drawing, and they take up all our time. What we really need are different requirements. Then art majors could take a better variety of classes, all the things we are interested in.
That makes sense. But the thing about the professor.
Well, that's true. But still, they are being drastic. If money is the problem, they could hire a part time professor, or most of the professors in the department have secondary fields.
Really?
Yeah, at least a few painting teachers are also great sculptors, I am sure one of them could teach a class.
Task 4 This happens all the time with kids in schools. Say, there is a little boy or a girl who is just starting school.
Well, they are not really used to the rules about proper behavior for a classroom. So, at the beginning they might.. I don't know, interrupt the teacher, walk around the classroom when they are supposed to be sitting down. You know, just misbehaving in general. Okay, but what happens? Well, the teacher gets angry with them when they act this way. They might get punished. They have to sit at their desks when everyone else is allowed to go outside and play. And they certainly don't like that. Soon, they will learn that this kind of behavior gets them in trouble. They 'll also learn that when they raise their hand to talk to the teacher and sit quietly and pay attention during class, they are rewarded. The teacher tells them she is proud of them and maybe puts little happy face stickers on their homework. Now that their behavior gets a good reaction from the teacher, the kids learn to always act this way in class, and not behave the way they used to.
Task 5 Hey, Jennifer, How are things going?
Well, I am relieved it's the end of the semester, but that's actually part of my problem.
What do you mean?
Can you believe this? My computer broke yesterday, so it's at the shop being repaired. It won't be ready until the end of next week which is when all my papers are due.
Why not use the computer lab? They've got lots of machines there.
I know, but it gets so noisy there that I can't keep my mind on my work. I mean when I am at the computer, I am not just typing, I am thinking, so I need quiet to concentrate.
Maybe you could try going in the morning or evening, it might be less noisy then.
Maybe, but this time of year everybody is working on papers and it could be crowded even then.
What about calling back the computer repair shop to see if they can have your computer ready at the beginning of next week instead? That would still give you enough time to finish your papers by the end of the week.
Oh, I haven't thought of that. The only problem is that the shop is closed today, and tomorrow for the long holiday weekend. So it would be a few days before I could talk to them.
Task 6 If a consumer has to choose between two products, what determines the choice? Assume that someone, a purchaser, is choosing between two products that cost the same. Okay? If people have a choice between two identically priced products, which one will they choose? They choose the one they think is of higher quality, of course. But what does it mean for a product to be a high quality product? Well, business analysts usually speak of two major factors of quality. One factor is reliability, and the other is what we call features. So reliability. What's reliability? Well, a product is reliable if it works the way we expect it to work. If it can go a reasonable amount of time without needing repairs. If a product, a car, for example, doesn't work the way it should and needs repairs too soon, We say it's unreliable. So product reliability means basically, the absence of defects or problems that you aren't expecting. It used to be that when people thought about product's quality they thought mainly about reliability. Today, it's different. People do still care about reliability, don't get me wrong. It's just that manufacturing standards are now so high that we 'll take cars for example, today.
Today 's cars are very reliable. So reliability is important, but it's not going to be the deciding factor. So if reliability isn't the deciding factor anymore. What is? Features. All those extras, the things a product has that aren't really necessary but that make it easier to use or that make it cool. For example, new cars today are loaded with features like electric windows, sunroofs, air-conditioning, stereos and so forth. When people are comparing products today, they look at features. Because reliability 's pretty much equal across the board.
And that's why manufactures include so many features in their products.
TPO8
Task 3 Did you read this article? Are they serious?
Yeah, I think so. Why?
Well, first of all, a lot of kids aren't looking for a relaxing break at lunch time. They like to study while they eat, especially if they have exams coming up or some assignment they have to get done.
Yeah, that's true.
And now, they won't be able to concentrate. This 's gonna be very distracting.
Hen, okay, yeah, I see your point.
And second, most students don't like classical music.
It's certainly not what I listen to.
So are people going to stop listening to their own music?
No.
I think people are going to be even more likely to bring their MP3 player, you know, to play their own music and block out the classical stuff.
Yeah, that makes sense.
Task 4 There is a large tropical insect called the peanut bug. Yes, like the peanuts that you eat. Um, and the peanut bugs' front wings are colored so that they blend in with their surroundings. But its back wings which are usually closed and hidden have these bright colorful spots on them. And when the peanut bug is attacked, it suddenly opens its back wings and out pop these big bright colors. And that surprises the predator and gives the peanut bug a chance to get away. Um, and then you have a butterfly called the morpho butterfly.
And parts of the morpho buttery 's wings are very shiny. They reflect a lot of sunlight. When this butterfly is resting, this shiny part of its wings is hidden. Now morpho butterflies are often attacked by birds. So when a bird approaches, the morpho flies away. And when the morpho flaps its wings, all the bird can see are flashes of light reflected from the morpho's wings. Those flashes of light make it very difficult for the bird to follow the morpho. And the morpho is usually able to get away.
Task 5 Hey Steve, are you ready for classes to start?
Not really. There is still a big conflict in my course schedule.
What's wrong?
This is my last semester, and I've still got two required courses left to take in order to finish my literature degree.
Okay.
I have to take both history of the novel and Shakespeare or I can't graduate. Problem is the two courses meet at the same time.
A, oh. What are you going to do?
Well, I talked to the professor who is going to teach shakespeare, he said I could do an independent study to fulfill that requirement.
How would that work?
I'd read the assigned texts on my own, do all the same assignments and meet with him when I need to if I have any questions.
Well, that sounds like a good way to fulfill the requirement.
Yean, plus, it would be nice to have one on one discussion with the professor. It's just that, well, working on my own like that. I am kind of concerned I won't be able to motivate myself to get the work done on time. It's easy to put things off when it's not actual class, you know?
Yeah, are there other options?
En, yeah, I found out that the Shakespeare class being offered at another university about half an hour from here. That university has a really great literature program. And our university will accept their credits. So.
That's an idea.
Yeah, I am sure it would be a good class and it'd fulfill the requirement. Only thing is, you know, I have to drive a half an hour to get to the class and a half an hour to come back. Three times a week. That's a lot of time and gas money.
Task 6 Today, we'll talk about how companies determine the initial price for their products. By that I mean, when they first introduce a product to the market. There are different approaches, and today we'll discuss two of them. They are quite different, each with their own advantages. One approach or strategy sets the initial price of the product high, followed by a lower price at a later stage. Why? Well, when introducing a new product, companies want to build a high quality image for it. Products that cost more are believed to be of higher quality. So during the early stages of the product life cycle, companies can make very high profits from consumers willing to pay more for a high quality product. And although consumers know that the prices will eventually go down, they are also willing to pay more to get the product sooner. This approach works very well with, oh, innovative high tech products for example. Now just think about when video recorders or video cameras or even cell phones first came out. They were very expensive. But then they became much more accessible. Another very common strategy sets an initial price low. Now this happens when the market is already saturated with the product. And the strategy is to undercut its competitors. Say there is a newly starting computer maker trying to gain market share. So what did they do? Well, they offer a computer at an affordable price, lower than existing brands. By doing this, the company appeals to new consumers who weren't probably even interested in getting a computer, and well, of course to existing consumers who might now be tempted to switch brands. Now how does this company make profits with its low price computer? Well, one thing that's often done is to encourage their customers to buy accessories also manufactured by them, like printers or software for example.
TPO9
Task 3 Read this announcement?
Yeah, and I disagree. I don't think it will actually help students.
Really? Why not?
Well, they talked about leadership and organizational skills, but that's not really the kind of work you do. Like my elder brother's had the kind of jobs they are talking about, and typically you are just there to do basic tasks like typing or filing stuff. Nothing very meaningful.
Oh, so you would 't actually learn anything new.
Exactly.
Oh, I guess I see what you mean. But what about the other point they make?
About this helping us after we graduate? I don't agree.
How come?
Well, the problem is that there are lots of other universities in our area that have the same requirement. So there are lots of other students at these positions.
Yeah, I guess I had 't thought of that.
So even if you take a position like this in a company while you are still a student, once you graduate, the competition for permanent jobs will be impossible. I mean there just won't be enough jobs available for all the business graduates in the city who'll be looking for full time work.
En, I see what you are saying.
Task 4 The other day I went to this great new movie and one of the scenes in particular I thought was really set up nicely. At the start of the scene, before the action and talking and things started. You saw, on the movie screen, an image of a city. You could tell that it was a big city. There were lots of buildings, tall ones, skyscrapers. And the cars and signs on the city streets looked old fashioned. Like they were from the past, like the 1940s. The other thing I noticed right away from this first image just when the scene started, was that the city seemed, gloomy. You couldn't see much because it was, well, there was mostly darkness rather than sunlight. And there was only just a little bit of light from the street lamps. On top of that, it was raining and a kind of foggy. All of these details worked together to create a dark gloomy, mysterious of feeling. So then when the action started, and it showed detectives talking to each other in an office. I already knew that the office was located in a tall building in a big city sometime in the 1940s. And I had a good idea that the evens that would be taking place, would be pretty dark and mysterious because of the shot, the image I saw at the beginning of the scene.
Task 5 Hey, Beth? How are things?
Not great.
Why, what's wrong?
I just found out I had to move out my apartment. Like right away.
You are kidding, why?
Well, my apartment is.. It's in a house, a kind of old house. And now, something is wrong with the water pipes, I think some of the pipes burst, or wore out or something. Anyway, we don't have any water in the house and apparently it's going to take about two weeks to fix the problem.
So you need to find a place to live for what. Two weeks or so?
Yeah, bad timing, a ha. With mid term exams coming up and everything.
So have you figured out what you are going to do?
Well, some friends said I could stay at their place, they don't have an extra bedroom. But they said it 'd be okay for me to sleep on their living room couch.
You could probably handle that for a couple of weeks, right?
I guess so. I mean it's really nice of them to offer, and it's free. The only problem is they already have four people living there, so it could be a little crowded.
And not ideal for studying for mid terms.
Yeah, too many distractions.
Any other options?
Well, I did find this place, it's a small hotel over on third street right near campus.
Oh, right. A lot of kids' parents stay there when they come for a visit.
Right. So I could get a room there. They have a weekly rate and it's pretty reasonable. But, I don't know.
At least at the hotel you'd have a space on your own, you know, so you could get more done.
That's definitely a plus. But I have to think about it. Even though it's pretty cheap, it will still end up costing me some money and my budget is pretty tight right now.
Task 6 We all know that insects like to eat plants. But some plants have been able to.. to develop ways to protect themselves from insects. Today I am going to talk about some ways plants defend themselves. Now, some plants have physical features that prevent insects from landing on them, like the passion plant for example, its leaves have little spiky hairs all over them. They are like spikes, sticking out of the plant that are so numerous and dense that they prevent insects from landing on the leaves. Basically there is just no room for the insects to land. And since insects can't land on the leaves they can't eat them. So the little hairs serve as a physical feature that helps protect the passion plant from insects. All right, but other plants protect themselves using chemical defenses, like the potato plant. The potato plant's able to release a chemical throughout its leaf system whenever an insect attacks it, starts eating a leaf. So saying an insect starts eating a potato plant's leaf. That will cause the plant to react by releasing a chemical throughout its leaf system. The insect swallows this chemical as it eats and this chemical discourages the insect from wanting to eat any more of the plant. How? Well, the substance makes the insect feel full, like it's already had enough to eat.
The insect no longer feels hungry. So it stops eating the plant. So by emitting this chemical, the potato plant protects itself from insects.
TPO10
Task 3 Mary, you are an art student. What do you think of this letter?
I don't like the idea.
Why not?
Well, first of all, his first point about a lot of people passing through the student center, that's true, but… But?
But it's always really crowded with people coming and going, it's not good for showing artwork. Imagine you are standing there, trying to look at a painting. There's gonna be like a million people walking through, people walking in front of you, blocking your view, distracting you.
En, yeah, I hadn't thought of that.
You won't be able to appreciate the artwork, or get a good look at anything with so much going on with so many people moving around.
Yeah, I see what you mean.
Plus, he is wrong about the windows.
But isn't true that it's good for art to have lots of light?
In a sense, yeah, but that kind of light, all that natural light from windows? That's actually not good. Because if it's really sunny out, it will be way too bright. If it's cloudy, it will be way too dark.
Oh! What you want is controlled light, consistent light. The kind you get from electric light bulbs. Think about in an art museum. In an art museum, you've got electric lighting, and the light is always carefully controlled, always at the same level.
Task 4 Okay, so I've actually got a few different examples of this. You know, when I was a kid, a character named action hero was really popular with my friends and me. We would always watch the action hero program on television every week and play games pretending that we were as strong and powerful as he was. Then pretty soon, we began seeing this small action hero figures in all the stores and well, we all just had to have them, I mean we 'd been watching the television show for so long that it seemed only natural to want to own the toys, too. Well, I finally grew up and left the action hero television program and toys behind. But now, I have a seven year old daughter who watches television a lot and also likes to play with her toys, and lately her favorite toy is a cute little baby doll with a big round face and lots of curly hair named Rosa. All my daughter 's friends have Rosa dolls too, and they enjoy going to each other 's houses to play with them. Then a few weeks ago, my daughter came running up to me all excited, because she had just heard there was going to be a new television program on every week with the doll, Rosa, as the main character. So, naturally, she and all her friends have begun watching the show. And it's already very popular, as popular as the toy doll.
Task 5 Is there a problem with the electricity?
Yeah, this storm's smacked up power all over the city. And they are saying it might be several hours before we have electricity again.
Oh, no. I have a history paper due tomorrow and I 've been writing it on my lap top computer and the battery is running low. I am going to need electricity soon.
Well, you know, Jefferson city still has electricity and there is a library there where you can plug in your lap top. You could go over there and work on your paper. It's only about a twenty minutes' drive.
That's a good idea. Of course, I'd have to pack up all my stuff and it is raining outside.
Yeah, that's true. Well, why don't you just ask the professor for an extension? You know, tomorrow when you go to class, just ask him if he'd give you an extra day to get the paper done. I am pretty sure he 'd agree. You know, with this storm and all.
Yeah, that'd sure be a lot easier. But then he did tell us when he gave us the assignment that he wouldn't grant any extensions.
You don't think he'd grant an exception in this case?
I am not sure. It's a little risky, he might just say that we shouldn't have waited until the last minute.
Yeah. But maybe if other students had the same problem, you might be able to convince him.
Yeah, I mean it's not our fault the electricity went out. En..
Task 6 Okay, we generally assume that babies can feel only very basic emotions like happiness or anger. That is that babies just react to things that happen directly to them. HoWe'ver, some new research is suggesting that babies may be able to feel concern for others, to have empathy for others. Now empathy is a complex emotion. It involves a baby relating to someone else 's emotions, not just reacting to things happening directly to them. Let's talk about an experiment that may show that babies could be capable of feeling empathy. Okay, for the first part of the experiment, well, oh, mm, we 've always known that babies start to cry when they hear other babies crying, right? One baby in the room starts crying and all the rest join in, we 've always assumed that the other babies cried because they were reacting to the noise of the crying. That the noise itself was distressing. So in the experiment, researchers played a tape recording, a tape of babies crying, to another baby, and sure enough the baby started crying when he heard the sound of other babies crying. This was no surprise of course. And the researchers assumed that the baby cried because of the noise.
But the next part of the experiment was surprising. The researchers played the baby a tape of his own crying.
Now it was just as noisy so the researchers expected him to cry. HoWe'ver this time, the baby did not cry.
He wasn't upset by the sound of his own cry. Why not? Well, maybe it wasn't the noise that had made him cry before when he heard other babies' crying. In fact, maybe noise had nothing to do with it. It could be that the baby felt empathy for the other babies and that was why he got upset when he heard them crying. The researchers concluded that it is indeed possible that babies feel empathy concern for others.
TPO11
Task 3 The college is making a mistake with this new plan.
What do you mean? I think it'll really help accomplish the college 's goals.
Don't be so sure. All that construction, for two years? It's gonna create a lot of noise.
Well, you mean in the beginning, for students still living in the dorms.
Yeah, students who are trying to sleep or do work are constantly going to be disturbed. So people will try to get as far away as possible. Probably by moving off campus. So they will lose even more people.
Hen, I hadn't thought of that. But still, once all the construction is over, more people will probably want to live in the dorms, right? I mean the living conditions will be so much better.
If they can afford to, do you know how the college is planning on paying for this plan? By raising the cost of campus housing.
Oh, I didn't realize that.
Yeah, so if it's more expensive, why would people want to move back into the dorms if they can rent an apartment for less money?
Task 4 All right, so let's consider the work of the outsider artist Henry Darger. Darger lived by himself in a tiny apartment in Chicago in the 1900s. He had no friends and spent all his spare time there alone creating hundreds of paintings and drawings. He had never formally studied art, and kept his work completely private, so no one ever saw it or responded to it during his lifetime. And so when you see Darger 's work, you notice how unique it is. It doesn't remind you of anything you 've ever seen before. It's very much his own. For example, one piece, it's a water color painting. In this piece he illustrates a story, about the adventures of seven children. But see, Darger had a really hard time drawing human figures. Yet, he managed to come up with his own rather unique solution for the problem. He simply cut out pictures of children from newspapers and magazines and pasted them into his own painted illustration of trees, flowers, and grass. The results look ..um a little strange. Darger's picture looks more cluttered, more crowded with details than the pictures of other artists because its entire surface is painted and there are no spaces left empty. It's also a lot longer than the pictures of most other artists, about nine feet long.
Task 5 By the way, Frank, I heard you got a summer research position with professor Davis.
A ha, but I 've got a problem.
Oh?
Yeah, well, since I didn't hear from her for so long. I assumed I didn't get the position, so I didn't apply for a dorm room for the summer. I'm afraid it's too late for that now.
Yeah, the deadline for campus housing applications has already passed. So what are you going to do now?
Well, I can stay with my parents. They live two hours from here, so I thought I could drive and commute to campus every day. I know my mum and dad will be happy to have me over for a few weeks and most of my old friends will be home for the summer. So in a way, it would be fun.
Yeah, I understand. But you'd spend quite a bit of time on the road going back and forth. Won't you get tired?
Yeah, that thought did cross my mind. The other thing I could do is renting an apartment off campus, besides being much closer to work, I'd also save tons of money on gas.
Aha, then you'd have to pay rent.
I know, there is always something, isn't there?
Task 6 So we are talking about interior design, ah, specifically the basic principles typically used in home and office decoration in the United States. Effective designs create a delicate balance between two things. You need unity and you also need contrast, which is essentially a break in unity. Now this might seem a little contradictory, but let me explain why we need both of these for an effective design. So for the first principle, we need unity in our design, think of it as consistency. Well, an easy and a very effective way to do this is by bringing together similar elements, a common example is by matching colors, you pick a color and use it for different parts of the room. Say you pick green, and then use a light shade of green for the walls and maybe a somewhat darker shade for the fabric on the sofa. And finally complement that with a matching green in the rug. When elements match, the room is unified and gives its residents a sense of order and comforts.
Okay, but there is such a thing as too much unity. Remember you need a balance of unity and contrast, if all you do is focus on unity, the result will be a boring room. So what do you do? Well, you apply the second basic principle of design, which is contrast. Contrast serves to disrupt or break up the unity in places. But in a careful intentional way. Um, well, let's continue using color as an example. To create contrast, color contrast, you need to abruptly change your color scheme once a while. Ah, let's say, you could throw bright red cushions on your dark green sofa for example. Contrast makes things stand out. The green will look even greener next to the red. So, now your room is more interesting. Not completely the same. But watch out, too much contrast is also dangerous, just like too much sameness is. Too much contrast will make the room felt busy, chaotic.
TPO12
Task 3 What do you think of the proposal?
I think it will work. I mean the range of the station now is basically limited to the campus and so it's basically just a few programs. Mainly for students.
Yeah.
Well, if this proposal goes through. There will be more programs and they would give the students more professional experience as they experiment with programming for a much larger, you know, real life audience. And stuff like that will give them a better shot at getting a job after they graduate.
Of course.
Besides, the whole university will benefit from it.
What do you mean?
Well, you know my friend Tony, right? He told me that the radio station at his university did something like this about five years ago.
And?
Well, it's a success. They are making a lot of money out of commercials and they are using it to offer more scholarships and to help fund projects to renovate the facilities of other programs.
That sounds really good.
Task 4 Consider this experiment, two groups of people were asked to watch TV. And while they were watching, a picture flashed on the screen. Less than a second, very quickly, so it was barely noticeable. The picture was of a boy with a birthday cake. Now, like I said, there were two groups and each group saw a slightly different version of the picture. One group got the boy looking angry, in fact he was actually throwing the cake on the floor. The other group got a picture of the boy smiling, happy, holding out the cake like he was offering it.
Same boy, same cake. But different emotions expressed in each picture. Every one was then asked to look at a different image. Now this is a third image, right? Again, it's the boy and the cake. But this time the image stayed on the screen. In this picture, the boy is just holding the cake. Basically, no emotion on his face, everything very neutral. Now, remember, no body knew they 'd already seen a picture of this boy. After a minute, every one was asked to describe the boy 's personality. Those who had been exposed to the image of the angry boy, they generally described the boy 's personality negatively. Those who 'd early seen the happy boy described him, well, positively.
Task 5 Hey, Madison, what's wrong?
Oh, I am just struggling about what to do. I won an award from the Pacific journalism institute for an article I submitted, and...
Hen, doesn't sound like anything's wrong.
Well, it's a huge honor to win. And there is an award ceremony they've invited me to attend which I am super excited about, but.. and here is what's frustrating I have got a philosophy exam that's scheduled end right when the ceremony begins.
A oh.. You are saying you'll just be finishing up taking the exam right when the ceremony starts?
Exactly.
But those ceremonies never start on time, they give long introductions, you know, have a general speech or something before they ever get to handing out awards. I am sure they won't be ready to hand out your award right at the beginning. Just going when you are done with the test, you won't miss anything important.
Maybe, but that 's a bit risky. I don't want to miss being there when they announce my name.
Well, have you talked to your professor about this?
Doctor Forester? No.
Maybe she 'll let you take the exam some other time.
True, she lets people reschedule exams sometimes. But she always makes them take it a couple of days early, that would mean less studying time for me which I am not through about.
Less time to study, oh.
Like I said, I am still struggling about what to do.
Task 6 So when we talk about the demand for a product, we are referring to how much consumers want to but it, right? And often the demand for a product is influenced by its price. The more expensive it becomes, the less chance that people will want to buy it. Okay, but that's not the whole story. Sometimes, the demand for a product can also be influenced by the price of other related products. First there are those products called substitute goods, if products can be substituted for one another then, well, then, they are called substitute goods. They are similar enough to be interchangeable. And an increase in the price of one means an increase in the demand for the other, like… like butter and margarine. They are pretty much used for the same purposes. Margarines are butter 's substitute. And you can bake equally well with either. Well, when the price of butter goes up, it becomes less affordable, and so what will people do? They buy margarine instead, right?
So, you see, an increase in the price of butter, increases the demand for margarine. Now another instance where the price of one product can influence the demand of another is ar.. is when you have two products that can't be used without each other. Those products, we call complement goods, they complement or complete each other if you will, like compact discs and compact disc players. You need both products in order to use either, so if the price of either product increases, demand for both is likely to decrease. And if the price of CDs goes up, well, demand for them will go down, right? And because CDs and CD players complement each other, what will also happen, is that the demand for CD players will go down, too.
TPO13
Task 3 So what do you think of the university 's new plan?
Oh, I don't know. I don't think it's going to work.
No?
I mean I can't imagine top students being too thrilled about some of the conditions on this campus.
What do you mean?
Like the science laboratories having such old outdated equipments and the library needing more books and the student center being so small. I think that the two million could be spent at better places if the university is really serious about achieving its goal.
Okay, but what about the other reason for building the stadium? I mean right now, we have so little contact with the town, Yeah, but this won't help relations. Look, people from town hardly ever come to games because our teams always lose and they are not suddenly going to improve overnight. Besides, adding seats won't make a difference. I mean if people from town didn't come before, they won't come now just because the place is bigger.
Task 4 Let's take an everyday example. An ordinary round plate like you 'd find in a kitchen. If you hold the plate directly in front of your face and look at it. What shape do you see? A perfect circle, right? Suppose you tilt the plate to a different angle, to a horizontal position. Like you are planning to put food on it, still a perfect circle? No, the circle is now stretched out, flattened into an oval. Do you conclude the plate has actually changed shape? Or that it's a different object, not the same plate? Of course not, it looks different, but we perceive it as still being the same. Here is a different example. This classroom we are in, it's fairly large, right?
Now, from up close, from the front row, I appear to be relatively big, bigger than if you were in the last row, right? But let's say you are sitting in the front row today, but tomorrow you are sitting in the back row. From back there, I am going to look smaller, but you don't think I've actually gotten smaller. You don't think you are seeing a different professor, a guy who looks like me except he is smaller. No matter where you are, up close or far away, you understand without even thinking about it, that I am the same size, the same person.
Task 5 Hey, Mark, how is it going?
En, not too good.
What's wrong?
Well, you know how I am president of the anthropology club. Well, I am supposed to drive everyone in the club to see a special exhibit at the museum tomorrow. My mum said I could borrow her van, you know, so everyone would fit. But, unfortunately it broke down and it's not going to be repaired in time for the trip.
Oh, so what are you going to do? Can you rent a van?
Yeah, that's a possibility. It's a little risky for me though, I have tried to get in touch with the club members, but only four have gotten back to me and said that they can contribute some money to the cost.
What about the other members?
I don't know. It'd probably be okay with them, too. But that's the risk, I don't know for sure. I don't want to get stuck with having to pay for most of the bill.
Well, since not everyone has gotten back to you, why don't you just postpone the trip? You know, until your mum 's van is repaired.
Yeah, I could do that. Though I am sure everyone would be real disappointed if they show up tomorrow ready to go, and find out that we are not going.
Task 6 Now, many sea animals, in order to hide from predators have overtime developed different kinds of camouflage to help them blend in with their environment and avoid detection by predators. Picture the surface of the sea floor, it is as varied as the land we live on. It's got peaks, and valleys, vegetation, rock areas and some sea animals have developed permanent colors or shapes to resemble these environmental features. This camouflage helps disguise them from predators by enabling them to blend into a specific part of the sea. For instance, take a kind of fish, like the leafy sea dragon, well, the name says it at all. It resembles a small green dragon with leaf like protrusions sticking out like arms. And because of its color and shape, it blends in extremely well with green sea plants. So when the leafy sea dragon is swimming through these plants, predators have trouble seeing it. But when it enters other environments, without these green plants, its camouflage doesn't work any more. Now other sea animals are difficult to spot anywhere in the sea.
Because their type of camouflage enables them to change color, take the cuttlefish, a fish that's closely related to the squid and octopus. Unlike leafy sea dragons, cuttlefish have not developed any particular shape to hide from predators. But they have a lot more mobility because their camouflage allows them to blend into any environment. Because cuttlefish have shifting pigments that allow them to change color in a matter of seconds. And so they can almost instantaneously match the color of their surroundings. If they are swimming by green sea plants, they 'll turn green, and if they are swimming over the brown seafloor, they'll turn brown.
TPO14
Task 3 Did you see this letter, Jim?
Yeah.
They are kind of nice to be able to do that, aha.
No, actually I don't think it's a good idea.
Why not?
Well, like the part about how it would help students concentrate. I mean, maybe a little snack will help the person who is eating it, but the trouble is that it makes it hard for everyone else to concentrate, because they have to listen to someone munching on chips, biting into an apple or crinkling paper wrappers.
I guess it can be a kind of disruptive.
Yeah, it would interfere with everyone 's concentration. You would 't be able to pay attention with all the noises going on.
Okay, I guess have to agree with you on that. But what about her other reason, it would be nice to be able to have some fun at the end of the semester, right?
No, there is a problem with that, too.
Why?
Well, I don't think it's appropriate to use class time for that kind of thing, I mean the last classes are usually pretty important. That's when we do a lot of reviewing for final exams.
True.
If we use that time for that, we probably wouldn't have time to do as much reviewing which means we wouldn't be as well prepared for exams.
Yeah, I hadn't thought of that.
Task 4 Okay, so this comes up a lot when people make career decisions. A friend of mine from college always wanted to be a film reviewer. He was a film major and he loved movies. Most of all, he loved to write about movies. So when he graduated, he looked for a job as a film reviewer for a newspaper, because as a film reviewer, he'd get to see films for free and would be paid to write about them. That's what he loved. But he couldn't find a job as a film reviewer, so he took a position as a news reporter instead, for a newspaper, investigating stories, writing about events, what news reporters do. Now, at first, my friend was not sure he'd be at any good at this. He 'd never been a news reporter before. But eventually, he adjusted and gained confidence and he got used to the job. And he realized he was actually a pretty good reporter.
Anyway, here is the thing, after a few years, the film reviewer for the newspaper where he worked quit and my friend was offered her job. This was his dream, right? His opportunity to be a film reviewer had finally come, and the new job would actually pay more, too. But did he take the job? Nope, he turned it down, he told me he'd gotten used to being a news reporter. And he just didn't want to try something else. It seemed like too big of a change since while there was a chance that the new job might not work out.
Task 5 Hey, Matt, how 's it going?
Oh, so so. I 've got a problem with my housing for next semester and I have to make a decision soon.
What's going on?
Well, I live in a dormitory and I have had a great roommate for the last two years but he is moving off campus next semester.
Oh. So..
So now I have to make a big decision, you know, about my living arrangements.
Well, couldn't you just get a new roommate? Doesn't the university automatically assign someone to take his place?
Yeah, they do. The thing is I am concerned about sharing a room with somebody new. There could be problems, like what if he wanted to go to sleep at ten o'clock? I am used to studying late at night, and that would throw off my whole study schedule.
I guess that's possible. But it is convenient to be on campus, easy to get to class and all. What else could you do?
Well, my roommate found a house off campus with some other friends and there is another bedroom available. I could have it, but I have to let them know by the end of the week.
A house sounds like a good idea. It 'd be fun to live with a group of people.
True, and it would definitely be economical, with everyone splitting the rent. But it's just that this house is really far from campus. I'd have to wake up much earlier to get to class. It 'd just be a lot more inconvenient than living in the dorm.
Task 6 A lot of plants and animals live near the surface of the ocean, and that means there is a lot of food near the surface, because there are lots of plants and animals to eat. But if you go down to the deepest parts of the ocean, it's cold and dark. And there is not a lot living down there. So, food is very scarce. So organisms that live down at these great depths have developed special adaptations to help them survive in this environment where food is so hard to find. For example, many deep sea organisms have body features that enable them to eat prey that are larger than themselves. A good example, aum.. There is a species of eel that has an enormous mouth and a large stomach that's capable of expanding. And these unusual features allow this eel to eat prey larger than itself. That's a big advantage because the eel eats something big. That's a lot of food, a lot of nutrition. So the eel can go for quite a while before it has to find food again. Another helpful adaptation in some deep sea organisms is the ability to generate light. And some organisms use that light to help them capture food. For example, there is a kind of fish, called the angler fish. And on its head, this fish has a little structure that produces light that glows in the dark. This little structure, this little light is positioned close to the fish 's mouth. Other fish are attracted to this light, they think it's something small they can eat. So they swim straight toward it and that brings them close enough for the angler fish to capture them and eat them.
TPO15
Task 3 Hey, Ted, you are a runner. Did you see this letter in the paper?
Yeah, I did and I used those.
And?
I think it's a terrible idea.
How come?
Well, she really hasn't thought it thorough. Like the thing about making them safer, which she is not thinking about is the long term consequences of running on a hard surface.
What do you mean?
I mean it's not good for you. It's too hard on your bones and joints. If you run repeatedly on a hard surface, it can lead to injuries or that's what I have been taught anyway. It's better to run on a soft surface. It does less damage to your body.
Oh, I wasn't aware of that.
Yeah, so actually it wouldn't be safer. And her second point… About changing the way they look?
Yeah, I don't think people will like it.
So they 'd use them less?
Yeah, I mean one of the main reasons people enjoy them now is it's a way of taking a break from the rest of campus, from buildings and streets and stuff. It's, you know, a chance to feel like your are out in nature.
Oh, so you wouldn't get that affect any more.
Right. It'd be just like you are on a regular street or sidewalk, it wouldn't be as relaxing.
Task 4 For example, I recently read about a case in which researcher was given two groups of monkeys and he was asked to train these monkeys to pick up a ball and put it in a box. And he was told to record how many hours it took to train each monkey to learn to do this. Now, before he started the training, the researcher was told that one group of monkeys was highly intelligent. And that the other group was less intelligent. In truth, there was no difference between them. All the monkeys were actually very similar in terms of intelligence.
But the researcher didn't know that, he thought one group was smarter, so he expected that that group would be easier to train. So, what happened? Well, the researcher trained the monkeys to perform the action and it turned out that on average, it took him two hours less time to train the supposedly smart monkeys than these supposedly less intelligent monkeys. Why? Well, it turns out that with the supposedly smart monkeys, the researcher smiled at them a lot, gave them a lot of encouragement, talked to them a lot, worked hard to communicate with them. But with the monkeys he thought were less intelligent he wasn't as enthusiastic. He didn't try quite as hard, wasn't quite optimistic.
Task 5 Hey, Kerry, What's the matter?
Well, you know I'm in the choir, right? And we have a concert tonight in an hour, just an hour from now?
I know, I am going. Really looking forward to hearing you sing. What's the trouble?
Well, we are all supposed to wear white shirts and black pants at the concert, you know, so we all look the same.
Right?
Well, I wore my white shirt to dinner and I spilt spaghetti source all over it.
Oh no.
Yeah, there is a huge red stain on it. I can't wear it for the concert now. It's the only white shirt I have and there is no time to go to the store to buy another one.
Wow, what are you going to do?
Well, I just called the choir director, and he is obviously unhappy about all this, but I told him about another shirt I have. It's not exactly white, not white like the others, sort of off-white, sort of cream colored. And he says it's okay for me to wear it. But..
But it's not exactly the same color as the others'.
Right. I'll feel kind of funny. Some people in the audience would probably be able to tell.
En, don't any of the other choir members have an extra white shirt you could borrow?
No, I've already asked around. But my roommate has one.
Great! Use hers.
Well, the thing is she's out of town, I've tried calling her but haven't been able to reach her. She probably wouldn't mind. But, you know, I have never borrowed any of her stuff before, and I really don't like taking things without asking.
Task 6 Birds, have some of the best vision capabilities in the animal kingdom. Some birds species have vision that is eight to ten times greater than humans. Overall, a bird 's eyes are extremely important for its survival. One aspect of birds' eyes that play a role in helping them survive, in other words, to find food or to avoid predators is the position of the eyes in the skull. Some birds have eyes that face forward on the skull, kind of similar to how humans' eyes are positioned. Forward facing eyes allow a bird to clearly see and judge distances. Because it can focus on objects with both of its eyes. And correctly perceive height, width and depth. One type of bird with eyes positioned in the front of the skull is the hawk. Hawks eat animals like mice.
Hawks have such good eyesight that they can spot a tiny mouse in the field from high up in the air. They spot the mouse and swoop down to catch it. Without such good eyesight. They would not be able to spot or catch their food. Other birds have eyes that are located on each side of the skull. This positioning of the eyes can help a bird to avoid predators. Instead of just seeing what's directly in front, they can see things that are on either side, permitting them to watch for danger in all directions. Imagine a duck waiting near the edge of a lake, it needs to spend time eating grasses and insects. But it also is on constant lookout for danger from its predator, like the fox. And eye on each side of the duck 's head allows it to see a fox approaching from either side. If it spots a fox, it can then fly away to safety. The placement of the eyes are critical in helping the duck avoid predators.
TPO16
Task 3 Did you read that letter in the paper?
Sure, and though she's right about the problems, I don't think what she proposes will do much good.
Really?
Yeah, take her first suggestion. I mean have you seen the healthy center?
Of course, why?
Well, it's tiny, right? The center suffers from lack of space, so unless they build more treatment rooms or offices or something.
Oh, I see.
And also her second suggestion.
Seems like that'll help things out.
Well, not necessarily. I mean, think about it, a lot of students aren't even here on the weekends.
That's true.
They leave town and get away. There is not a lot of people here.
Yeah, like me, I go home probably at least twice a month.
Right. And a lot of us leave campus for the weekend even more often than that. So there's just not a lot of demand for treatment, then. See what I mean?
Task 4 Now a study was done that illustrated this phenomenon. In the study, people were given an ordinary task that everyone has probably done before. They were simply asked to peel potatoes, and to peel as many potatoes as possible in a given amount of time. Okay, so some people worked alone and they were told that the number of potatoes they each peeled would be recorded. Others peeled potatoes together as part of a group and they were told that only the total number of potatoes peeled will be recorded. So it would be impossible to tell how many any one person had done. Then, researchers compared the results of the people who worked alone and those that worked together to see if there was any difference, that is, they took the average score of the people working alone and compared it to the average score of the people working together in a group. And they did discover a difference, it turns out that people working as a group peeled significantly fewer potatoes than people who worked alone.
Task 5 Hey, Steve, did you get that book on the Russian revolution professor Harper wants us to read?
No, none of the bookstores in the campus area had it in stock. They'll get it in about two weeks.
Hen.. So what are you going to do in the meantime? Remember we are going to be discussing the book starting next Tuesday.
Well, I was thinking of placing a rush order with a bookseller on the Internet. So I'd have the book in about a day or two.
Yeah, but rush order delivery is expensive. You could easily spend twice as much money for the book that way.
I know, but what choice do I have?
Well, since we only have to read a few chapters at a time. You are welcome to share my copy for a few weeks.
You know, until you can get yours at the bookstore.
You mean, you would read the chapters assigned, give the book to me. I'd read those chapters then give the book back to you to read the next set of chapters, and so on?
Exactly.
Thanks, but, what if I don't get the book back to you in time, wouldn't you get behind in your reading?
Yeah, maybe, but it should work if we are careful.
Task 6 Okay, ever thought about the things that happen to you and what's responsible for them? We psychologists have a term, locus of control. Locus of control refers to.. um.. where people think control over their lives comes from. Whether it comes from themselves or from somewhere else. People who think that control is in themselves are internals and people who think it comes from somewhere else are externals. Let's say there are two people going for job interviews. One of them is an internal, she has an internal locus of control. Since she thinks that control comes from within herself, she will believe that her success and her preparation are really her responsibility. So she is likely to really work on her interview skills ahead of time. Then if she gets the job, she will believe that it's because she's worked so hard. And if she doesn't get it, well, she will probably be disappointed with herself and try to figure out how she can improve for the next time. Okay, and another job candidate is an external. He perceives other things, say, his interviewers to have more influence, after all, it's their decision. It depends on what mood they are in, and you know, luck. Now with his external locus of control, he is not as hard on himself so he is more likely to take risks. He might interview for a job that he is not completely qualified for and if he gets it, he will think he is really lucky and because he believes external forces are in control, he might think it's because the interviewers were having a good day. If he doesn't get it, he'll probably blame the interviewers or bad luck, rather than look at himself and try to figure out what he could have done better.
TPO17
Task 3 They are making a mistake.
What do you mean?
Look, they are trying to do away with distractions, so we can study better. But with this change, we won't have anywhere in the library to get together to work on group projects.
True. Group project work is common these days.
So instead of buying these new units they should use the money to build meeting rooms, and that will reduce any noise in the main library areas.
Yeah, that's what we could really use. There is just not much need to work in isolation.
Exactly, and the other thing is what's this about over crowding? Sure, we have more students enrolled at the university this year, but do we really have a problem with overcrowd?
I don't think so, I always get a whole table to myself.
Right, I see empty tables there all the time. It'll just be just a waste of money to replace what we have, since what we have now is sufficient for the amount of students that use the library.
Task 4 Let's start with an example you may be familiar with. What's one thing dogs typically do when they feel threatened when they want to protect themselves? That's right, they show their teeth. And when we see this, we know this behavior means basically stay away. Now, here is how this behavior became a recognizable warning. A long long time ago, a dog sensing danger would get ready to bite whatever animal was threatening him. It started by baring its teeth, but the purpose of doing this was something very simple. The dog instinctively was making sure it wouldn't bite its own lips when it bit the other animal, okay? But what happened? Other dogs, other animals, overtime, they learned that this teeth bearing always came before a dog was going to bite. And so they started to read it as a signal to be careful. To keep away or risk getting bitten. This scenario repeated time after time, also led to the dog 's awareness that by simply showing its teeth. A lot of the time, that was protection enough. What had been a simple physical preparation to bite had developed into a kind of defense mechanism, in and of itself. The dog learned it did not need to actually attack. But could get the right result from just communicating the possibility of an attack, through showing its teeth. It started to use this behavior as a warning signal.
Task 5 Hey, Sally, I just got the first draft of my research paper back from professor Stone.
Just now? I got mine back a few days ago.
Yeah, everyone else in the class that I know got theirs a few days ago, too.
But the deadline. You're running out of time.
Yeah, I'm worried. I only have one day to review all these comments and write my final draft. He made a lot of suggestions.
You should definitely ask professor Stone for a deadline extension. He should take some responsibility for this situation. It is sort of his fault, you won't have much time to work on it before the due day.
I've thought about that, but would he think I was being pushy or criticizing him for not getting the paper back to me right away? I don't want to offend him.
True, but it's your grade we are talking about. You've got a legitimate concern. But it's understandable if you're uncomfortable asking.
Yeah, I am in a tough spot.
You know, you could always just do your best with the time you have left, you are a good student, I bet you can finish it quickly ,work really fast and it'll still turn out good.
Do my best for the time I have left. Well, if I worked really hard, I imagine I might do okay, but I'd have to be sure to deal with all these comments, I need a good grade.
Task 6 Now let's talk about a particular cultural process, diffusion, since the beginning of human history, diverse cultures have taken advantage of one another's innovations when they've come into contact. Diffusion is the process whereby something cultural, like a custom, a type of food or an invention, is spread from one group to another or from one society to another. One group adopts a cultural item, or more selectively just part of a cultural item of another group. You see? Now diffusion can occur through a variety of ways, military conquest or tourism, or even something like the influence of satellite TV shows around the world. For example, take something like reading a modern newspaper here in the US, have you ever thought about where the letters, the characters on the page are reading? Where they came from? They were borrowed from another culture many centuries ago. Then the printing of the words, well that process was invented in Germany, and finally the paper itself. Paper was invented in China. These innovations from the all over the world were shared across cultures over time and so today we have newspapers in the US. So the process of diffusion might take place over long distances and over long periods of time. Now I am not saying that diffusion happens easily. As I mentioned, sometimes, it's selective. For instance, many people in the US have accepted the practice of acupuncture. The Chinese practice of using needles to cure a disease or relieve pain.
So lots of people in the US have realized that acupuncture is effective. But few of them fully understand or have committed themselves to the philosophy behind acupuncture. Cultures tend to resist ideas which seem too foreign, too different from their own beliefs and values. But the ideas which aren't perceived as too different are often incorporated, absorbed, diffused into their culture. So the practice of acupuncture has been absorbed into US culture but not the philosophy of Chinese medicine.
TPO18
Task 3 Jim, you are in the choir, right? What do you think about what they are doing next year, This article?
I really like it.
Yeah？ Yeah, the new director is right that it will motivate us.
How is that?
Well, some of the other schools are really good so we will really have to work hard to go up against them.
Yeah.
I mean, right now, we don't rehearse more than once a week. But if we know we'd be competing with other schools. We'd probably rehearse more often and improve our singing a lot.
That's true. The more you practice, the better you get. So, um what about what the article said about how this will help the program?
I hope it works, right now, our program is pretty small, but we have some really talented people. And it will be great to attract even more people.
So how will this plan help?
Well, if we go to these off campus events and other people hear us and think we are really good, we might be able to get some new students interested in coming to this university to be a part of our music program and perform at our choir concert.
You are right. I hadn't really thought about that.
Task 4 Okay, so a good example of this, found right here in north America is something an animal called the American pronghorn does. Pronghorn as you may know, are a kind of deer like animal. They live out on the open grassy plains. Somewhat in the middle of north America. And they are super fast. Pronghorn are in fact noted for being the fastest animal in the western hemisphere. Once a pronghorn starts running, zoom, none of its present day predators like the bobcat or coyote can even hope to catch up with it. It's off in a flash, okay, so why then do pronghorns run so fast? That's the question. Well, it turns out that quite a long time ago, I am talking tens of thousands of years. Things on the grassy plains used to be very different for the pronghorns. Because back then, lions used to live on the plains, chasing and preying upon the pronghorns and lions, of course, are a very swift moving mammal, much faster than the bobcat and coyote or other predators that you find on the plains today. But now, hoWe'ver, lions are all extinct in north America. There are no longer a predator of the pronghorn. Tens of thousands of years ago, though the lions were there chasing the pronghorns, so back then, the pronghorn's speed was critical to its survival.
Task 5 Hey, Mat, you've got your paper done for class today?
No, I just realize it's sitting on my desk. I wrote it last night, but I forgot to bring it with me.
Ah, so what are you going to do?
Well, I could drive home and get it. I live off campus, but if I hurry, I'd probably get home and bring the paper back before class was over. You know how strict she is about late submissions.
Yeah, but you'd miss part of the class.
I know.
Maybe you could talk to the professor, explain what happened and ask her if you could send it later by e-mail.
I know, but I'd have to do it after class because she always starts class right on time. There wouldn't be time to talk to her until after class.
Well, why don't you do that and hope she doesn't consider the paper late?
Task 6 People who are likely to buy a company 's product are called target customers. And these target customers influence a company 's marketing strategy. In order to develop a marketing strategy, a company will look at certain characteristics of the target customers to decide when and where to advertise so that they will reach the target customers most effectively. I'd like to talk to you today about two characteristics of target customers that can influence marketing strategy. Specifically, age and geographic location of the target customers. Say a company makes toy cars, who are its target customers? Kids, right? So if the company wants to make sure its television advertising reaches its target customers, they'd want to advertise during times when kids are actually watching television, like during children 's television shows. That way it can make sure that kids see the advertisements. And that way the company would get people in that age group to go buy toy cars or to ask their parents to buy them at least. Now another important characteristics to consider is geographic location, places where the company 's target customers live. Think about a company that makes boats, its target customers are people who own homes near oceans or lakes, places where they can use boats. After all, people who don't live near water don't have much use for boats. So by placing advertisements on signs along the road or on television in cities and towns that are near oceans or lakes. The company would be more likely to reach the target customers for its boats and sell more of them as a result.
TPO19
Task 3 Did you see this announcement in the newspaper? It sounds like a great idea.
You really think so? Not many people even use the place.
I know, that's the point. People don't go there because the facilities are old and the exercise equipment breaks down. I think the director is right that they get more use out of this way. Right now, the place is usually empty and that's too bad. Students can get pretty stressed out if they don't get some exercise.
That's a good point. But doesn't it seem like a lot of money?
It's not really all that much, if you figure a lot of people spend that kind of money on a CD or when they go out to the movies. This is just one charge for the whole year.
That's true, and instead of some little thing we get a recreation center people might actually use.
Right, so considering the benefits, it's really not that much to pay.
Yeah, I guess you're right.
Task 4 Okay, so an example to illustrate this. You often see this happen in families. Let's say there are these two kids, a sister and a brother. Let's say the girl is six and the boy is four. And one day they are all out shopping with their mother, and they are in a store and the girl sees a toy she wants. She asks her mother to buy it, to buy the toy for her, but the mother says no, so what does the little girl do? She starts crying and screaming, you know, mummy I want this. And finally, mum gives in and says okay, fine, you can have it and buys the girl the toy. Now, don't forget, the little brother is there and he is watching all this happen and maybe he sees this sort of thing happen a lot as mother giving in when his sister cries and screams, what do you think he is going to start doing when he wants something from mum? He'll probably cry and scream, right? But what if the opposite had happened? Say mum didn't give in and didn't buy the girl the toy, in fact say mum instead disciplined the girl for screaming and crying when they got home, she didn't let the little girl watch her favorite TV program. Again the little boy is watching, now, what's the little boy likely to do if he finds himself in a similar situation and he wants mum to buy him something. Chances are he is not going to cry and scream, right?
Task 5 How 's it going, Mary? Got your schedule all worked out for this semester?
It's coming together. Actually I just heard about my student teaching assignment.
Teaching assignment? You are student teaching?
Yeah, you know, I am majoring in education. So one of the requirements is to teach for a semester in a classroom. Usually at the local school in town, we help teach the kids at school one day a week. I just got my class assignment.
Well, that's good.
Yeah, but I've got a scheduling problem.
A oh.
The day I've been assigned to teach at the school in town will be the same day my Chinese history course meets here at the university.
En, well, could you wait to take the Chinese history course? Sign it up for another semester or something.
Yeah, but this one is taught by Doctor Zhang, he is a visiting professor, he will only be here one semester and he is supposed to be amazing. I am really interested in the class since I might be visiting China.
Is there another option?
Yeah, actually, the teaching assignment is on a day when I will be working with older kids, teenagers, but the school also needs a student teacher to work in a classroom with little kids like five and six years olds and it's on a different day when I am free. So I could do it.
So you could change your teaching assignment to a different day.
Yeah, it's just that I really want to teach older kids.
Oh.
I am planning on teaching older kids when I graduate. So it will be better experience for me, for my career.
Task 6 Today, I want to talk about sea birds. Now, sea birds hunt and eat fish. And well, their food can be hard to find because their food sources spread out over a large expanse of water. So what sea birds have done is that over time they've made adaptations. They've developed special characteristics that help them find food. One adaptation involves the length of the birds' wings. The albatross, for example, is a large sea bird that spends most of its life flying over ocean water in search of food, fish to feed itself and to carry back to the nest for its chicks. Now, most birds flap their wings up and down when they fly, which uses up a lot of energy.
But the albatross has these special long wings that it can hold perfectly still. It's able to fly without moving its wings up and down. These long wings allow it to glide or float on the wind. And this uses very little energy.
This is important, because as I said, the albatross has to cover huge expanse of ocean to locate food.
Sometimes, up to eleven hundred miles a day. Because of its long wings, it can glide along over the ocean using little energy as it searches for food. Another important adaptation of many sea birds is an acute highly developed sense of smell. Take the fulmar, like the albatross, the fulmar needs to find food that's scattered far out over the ocean, but the fulmar has a rather unusual advantage. It has tiny tubes inside the nose holes in its beak. And these special tube shaped nostrils help it to pick up the scent of food. Now this highly developed sense of smell is especially important because the fulmar's main source of food, plankton, are tiny organisms that are hard to see. But they give off a very sharp distinctive odor. So when fulmars are flying around looking for food they may not be able to see them. But they can find the plankton by smelling them even from far away.
TPO20
Task 3 What on earth is the university thinking?
En? What do you mean?
Well, those buildings aren't just used for classes. That's where my evening study group usually meets.
Oh, oh, of course, that's true. But you could go to the library instead.
Yeah, but the library only has a few rooms that people can use for group meetings, which is why classrooms have been so convenient. But now if it's winter and cold, where can we go?
Right, in the middle of winter, forget it or even if it's just kind of cold out.
It would be pretty unpleasant.
But still, they obviously have to do something about the situation.
Oh, I agree, they have to do something, but they should find a solution that isn't so destructive to academics nevertheless.
Such as...
Well, for one, if they replaced all those old windows. They are so drafty, they let the cold in. And if they insulated the buildings better, these are really old buildings, charming but..
But, not at all energy efficient. Yeah, you're probably right.
There are some really basic improvements they could make that'd make a huge difference in the long term.
That could solve the problem and still leave us somewhere to study.
Task 4 Okay, so we've been talking about starting a business. Let's say I want to open up a pizza restaurant. Well, I know how tough it is to make a new business succeed and I want to a sure thing. So I contact a big company that owns a chain of pizza places. Let's say it's called Pizza Town and I pay for the rights to call my restaurant Pizza Town and to sell Pizza Town 's special one of a kind pizza. Now since everyone has heard of Pizza Town, it's really popular. I don't have to worry about whether people will want to eat my pizza or not. I already know this pizza will sell well, because it's a known thing. And that means that there is a better chance my business will succeed. Now in exchange for being able to call my restaurant Pizza Town, I have to agree to run the business the Pizza Town way. And Pizza Town trains me to do this. They show me how do everything. How to make my pizzas taste like Pizza Town pizzas. How to advertise, even how to make my store look like a Pizza Town. Now this means that I don't have a lot of freedom or choice in the way I run my business. But in a lot of ways, this is great for me. After all, Pizza Town 's way generally works, they sell a lot of pizza.
Task 5 Are you still working in professor Green 's laboratory?
Yeah, he has been supervising my research on eating behavior in mice.
Sounds interesting.
It's fascinating. I've got a few more observations and experiments to do. It's another three months of work and then I will start writing my paper.
Well, sounds like it will be a great paper.
Thanks, I hope so. There is a problem though.
What?
Professor Green has been invited to teach at a university in France for a semester and obviously I still need a lot of help with the project.
En, what are you going to do?
Well, professor Green suggested professor, professor Baker? That I could work with another..
Oh, I have heard of her, professor Baker is quite famous.
Yeah. But I don't know her at all. And my research isn't in her area of expertise. She works with fish, my work is on mice. Not exactly the best match.
Well, you get to know her eventually and she is a great biologist. So she's still be able to help you even if your topic isn't exactly her specialty. She may give you some new perspective on your work.
I know. I am considering it. But still, I am still thinking about asking professor Green if he could advise me long distance.
That's a thought. You think he'd do it?
He probably would. But I don't know if it's a good idea. I mean he could always look at my data and read my write ups through email. But the thing is he wouldn't be here to supervise my experiments.
Yeah, well. I am sure you will figure out the best thing to do.
Task 6 When people are in difficult situations, sometimes they experience feelings of helplessness or psychological pain. So what will they do? They unconsciously use strategies called defense mechanisms to protect themselves psychologically from their painful emotions. Ah, let's say a woman has a pet dog. She's had this dog for a long time. And he's kept her company and guarded her for years but one day he runs away. This woman looks everywhere and asks other people if they've seen her dog. But she just can't find him. Now she feels helpless and sad because she misses her dog. So she'll unconsciously find ways to deal with her painful feelings, one defense mechanism she might use is fantasy. With fantasy, the woman uses her imagination, so instead of just feeling helpless and sad about her lost dog. She invents a happy story in her mind. She might imagine that a nice family found him and feeds him and that he is really happy with them.
She will picture the dog playing, running around, having fun because of this fantasy, she doesn't have to feel sad about her dog running away. It's a fantasy. It's not real, but it keeps her pain away. Another defense mechanism she might use is what we call sublimation, Sublimation is different from fantasy because sublimation isn't about pretending, it's about turning negative emotions into something useful, practical, so the women might start a dog training school that way by training dogs, perhaps she can help prevent other people 's dog from running away like hers did. In other words, with sublimation as a defense mechanism, the woman redirects her negative feelings about losing her dog into a positive constructive activity.
TPO21
Task 3 Did you read about the new plan?
Yeah, what do you think?
I think it's a great idea.
Really? Why?
Well, I just don't think the newspaper gives the most up to date information about activities.
Well, the paper comes out weekly. What's the problem?
The fact that it comes just once a week is the problem. I read the paper every Monday, but then I forget that they are having a concert or showing a film or whatever like on Thursday or Friday. And this 'll always give me a reminder. On the day of the event.
Yeah, that way you wouldn't forget.
And like if something gets canceled at the last minute, well, that way you'd know and you wouldn't waste time showing up and no one's there.
I haven't thought of that. That would be really helpful. But do you think students are actually going to read the email?
Are you kidding? Everyone checks their email at least once a day. And if maybe they also includes the cafeteria menu for the day in the email, well, then people are definitely going to read it.
You are so right, I can't wait until they starts.
Task 4 So I used to teach a class of eight year olds, and one problem I sometimes had was getting the kids to raise their hands when they wanted to answer a question. Like lots of teachers, I had the rule that if a student wanted to answer a question they needed to raise their hand in the air and wait until I call their name before speaking, that gave all the students a chance to participate, which helped everyone get more out of the discussion. But some kids had trouble following the rule. I remember there was one girl, Sarah, who didn't raise her hand when she wanted to answer a question. She would just call out the answer, and this was frustrating for the other children who were waiting patiently with their hands raised. So one day, when Sarah called out, I asked her if she knew that calling out was unfair to the other students. I said to her, "Sarah, do you realize that when you call out your answers without raising your hand, you are not being fair to the other students. You are not giving them a chance to answer questions, too." And I didn't wait for her to answer, I just continued teaching the class. And after that, anytime I asked the class a question, Sarah didn't call out the answer. She raised her hand along with everyone else.
Task 5 Hey, Sarah, when did your play open? The one you wrote and are directing.
In one week.
And how 's it coming along?
Well, the rehearsals have been going on pretty well. There is just one problem.
What's that?
We have a guy named Bill playing one of the supporting roles, one of the minor characters.
Okay.
And he just can't remember his lines. All the other actors have their parts memorized except Bill. We will be in the middle of rehearsing a big scene and he will forget what he's supposed to say next. I thought he'd eventually improve, but now I am not sure he will be ready for opening night.
Oh, no, that's not good. What can you do at this point?
Well, I could replace him. There are other actors on campus, actors who could play the part.
Yeah, since it's just a minor role, another actor could probably learn the part in time.
That's true. It's just that I don't know how he would feel about that. Removing him from the play could hurt his feelings and he was really looking forward to being in it.
I see, well, could you, I mean, maybe another thing you could do is spending time with him. After rehearsals, you know, work with him to help him learn and remember his lines.
Yeah, I could do that, but there are other parts of the production I try to take care of after rehearsals. So it'd take away from other things that I need to do before opening night.
Task 6 Back in the eighteenth century, in a time known as the industrial revolution. Some countries, well, England, in particular, started using new technology, like steam powered machines to produce goods. And the use of these machines brought about some significant changes. Let's go over two main changes that occurred. One change was that the center of production moved from homes to factories. Let's take fabric or cloth as an example. Historically, for a very long time, people had made cloth by hand in their homes, earning a little money from their home based cloth production. But then these new steam powered machines for waving cloth were invented and placed in factories and these machines could wave cloth much more quickly and efficiently. So there wasn't any reason to keep making cloth slowly in homes when it could be made faster on factory machines. Thus the majority of cloth production shifted from home based business to factory production. Another result of the new technology is that cities started to forming around factories. Like, let's say there was a cloth factory that was built in a certain small village. Now, of course, the factory needed workers to operate the machines used in cloth production. So the factory would hire a lot of rural workers, who would then move from the countryside to the village. So instead of being spread out all over the countryside, the workers started to congregate in the village with the factory. As a result, the village got bigger and bigger and eventually grew into a city.
TPO22
Task 3 So what do you think of this?
Well, I think it's a good idea, necessary, too.
Why is that?
Well, you know, I've actually been up to the admissions office a couple of times like to pick up some information for a friend, you know, and every time, I've ever been there. Wow, you can tell they are really busy.
Oh, really?
Yeah, those staff members are running around like crazy. On the phone, doing interviews, dealing with tons of paper work. So I can totally believe what they are saying about the time factor. Seems like having one last thing to worry about would be a good thing.
Sounds like it.
Yeah, oh and about the other point?
The different perspective thing?
En, hen, I think people like us would be really good at this. Unlike you know, I remember when I was first showed around the campus, the guy leading was, well, he was super nice. But there were some questions that he couldn't answer from experience.
Like what?
Well, practical things, which are the noisier dorms or which ones are the quietest, which student cafeteria he'd recommend? Stuff he didn't have first hand knowledge about. I mean how could he?
I see, our point of view might be more helpful.
Task 4 So I have a personal example, some years back, my wife and I were looking for a house to buy. We found this great old house out in the country, but my wife had her doubts about it, she noticed the house wasn't in very good condition. It was a little run down and probably needed some repairs. But I really fell in love with the architecture of the house, the unusual way it was designed and built, so I convinced my wife that we could hire people to fix it up and you know, make the house nice. We decided to buy it and live there after the repairs were finished. Well, the workers we hired to repair the house soon discovered things were worse than I thought. It turned out that the roof was damaged and needed expensive repairs. After the roof was repaired, the workers discovered that the house had electrical problems. Most of the wiring was bad, and would have to be replaced at a huge cost, well, at this point, my wife reminded me of her earlier doubts about the house and wondered if we could ever get it in good shape. But I just became more determined than ever. I paid for all the wiring to be replaced by an electrician. But it gets worse, the electrician noticed that insects had eaten into some of the walls and they would also have to be torn out and replaced. This was going to be more expensive than all the other repairs. But, by this point, I felt determined to keep going. I kept thinking I have to do it, if I stopped now, my wife will think I was wrong for not following her advice.
Task 5 Hey, Jane, did you finish your research paper for class?
Yeah, I printed it out this morning.
Why do you look so worried then?
Well, I was just in the cafeteria eating lunch and reading it over one last time when I spilled some soup on it and the class starts in fifteen minutes.
How bad is it! It's not huge. But you can definitely see it and several of the pages got wet.
What are you going to do?
I could just go head and handed it in like this and explain to the professor what happened. I mean you can still read the paper and the page should dry out a little by the time class begins. But there will still be sort of sticky and wrinkled.
Well, not all professors care that much about how the paper looks, at least it'd be in on time.
I know. It's just that professor Adams is kind of strict when it comes to handing in our research papers. I mean the format that he gave us for putting this paper together was really specific. So the way it looks seems important.
Yeah, well, how about going to the computer lab to print another copy?
I could, then I'd have a clean copy to hand in and I wouldn't have to worry about how the paper looks.
You'd better hurry though, because there's usually a line over there.
I know, and by the time I get there, wait in line for a computer, print the paper out and come back to class.
I'd be late for class. And professor Adams is strict about lateness, too.
I see what you mean.
Task 6 Many animals live underground in the soil, not just little animals like worms but also bigger animals like mammals, living underground has advantages, it protects animals from aboveground predators. HoWe'ver the underground environment also presents challenges, and animals that live underground have developed physical adaptations to deal with them. One challenge is well, simply how to move underground through the dirt. Another challenge for the animal is to protect vulnerable parts of its body from the environment that it's moving thorough. Now, moving through soil is not like moving through air or water. Because soil, earth is thick and dense. So animals that live underground have evolved physical features that help them move through dirt efficiently. For example the mole, a small furry mammal, has really wide super strong front feet with big claws. The mole's feet act like… like shoves so it can dig through the dirt. The claws cut into the dirt, loosen it up and then once the dirt is loosened up. The broad feet throw the dirt behind the mole as it moves forward. These shovel like front feet allow a mole to dig its way through the dirt astonishingly quickly. But even for an animal that can move efficiently through the dirt, living underground can still be problematic.
Because it's easy for particles to get caught in sensitive parts of the animal 's body. Like for mammals, in their eyes, so underground animals have developed adaptations to prevent this. Again, let's take the example of the mole, to begin with, moles have tiny eyes, and these eyes are covered with a thin skin, a protective membrane that's actually got hair on it. These hairs protect the mole's eyes from dirt particles. So as the mole goes digging through the dirt with its head pushed forward. The dirt particles come into contact with the hairy membrane covering the mole's tiny eyes. And the particles just slide by, don't get caught in the mole's eyes. So the eyes, the mole's sensitive parts are protected.
TPO23
Task 3 Hey, what do you think of this?
You mean the editors' decision?
Right.
Oh, I think they're right. It's the thing to do.
Really? Why?
Well, hardly anyone reads that section.
You don't think so?
Not really, I mean they only cover a couple of stories and most people already know about them before they even get around to reading the campus paper.
True, if you get the local paper, or use the Internet, you already know about the major stories.
Exactly, and the coverage is better, I think we should just stick with campus news and stuff.
So do you think what they are going to replace with it is better?
Definitely, right now, how do you learn about what's happening on campus?
Mostly from posters in different buildings or in the student center.
Right, the information is everywhere, but it's hard to keep track of it. I see stuff posted but then I forget about it half the time.
So you are saying that with this new section.
You could just cut it out from the newspaper and carry it around and check it anytime and know what's taking place, when and where.
Task 4 I have an example from my own life that illustrates this. When I first began my university studies, I became friends with a butch of arts students. They were older and fun and very creative and I thought they were really cool, and they all liked to dress really casually, in T-shirts and jeans and sneakers, that's what they wore all the time, to class, to the library, to dinner, everywhere. T-shirts, and jeans and sneakers, so that's what I started wearing too. And I fit right in and I felt really cool. But then I graduated, moved to Chicago and got a job, and I started working with some really bright young people who'd already been working at the company for a few years, who were already handling major responsibilities for the company. Really impressive, and sometimes, some of us would get together on the weekend maybe for a concert or a baseball game or something. And at first, I just wore a T-shirt and jeans and sneakers, that was, you know, how I was used to dressing. But I soon noticed that my coworkers preferred to dress up a little bit. The men would wear a nice pair of pants, bottom up shirt. The women might wear a fashionable dress and some nice shoes. They dressed in clothes a lot nicer than what I was used to wearing. And I started thinking, you know, that looks really classy, really sharp, and so I started to dress the same way they did, you know, nicer, a little more formal. And I don't know, somehow my T-shirt and jeans and sneakers didn't seem as cool to me anymore.
Task 5 How's it going, Mike?
Okay, I am just trying to figure out what to do about this new bus schedule.
New bus schedule?
Yeah, I take a bus from campus to my job downtown, I work there Tuesday afternoons, but the bus schedule changed. The bus I was taking is leaving earlier now. And I can't get to it in time because I've got chemistry class then.
Hen, yeah, they do change this bus schedule sometimes it's inconvenient. So what are you going to do?
Well, I talked to my boss, and she said I could change my work hours and work at night instead. I start late in afternoon and then work till midnight. And there is a bus that'll get me there on time.
That sounds good. So you can just take a later bus to your job.
Yeah, the only thing is if I work late at night, I will be really tired and I have class early the next morning.
Yeah, but do you have any other choice?
Well, yeah, another option is just to ride my bike to work after chemistry. I'll be able to get to work on time so I can keep my same hours. It's not that far, and it'll take about fifteen minutes.
En, that might be nice because you get some exercise but it'd be uncomfortable riding a bike on days when there is bad weather.
Yeah, I'll have to think about it.
Task 6 Now, plants like animals, and like us for that matter, need nutrients, substances that provide nourishment to survive, thrive and grow. We get our nutrients from the food we eat, plants though, most plants anyway absorb their nutrients from the soil, right? Through their root systems? Okay, but there are plants that don't get their nutrients from the soil, the places they grow, the soil is bad, so they get their nutrients from insects instead from trapping and digesting insects. They are called carnivorous plants. Carnivorous plants capture insects in different ways, they have different trapping mechanisms. Active traps and passive traps. A plant with an active trap, a good example is the Venus fly trap. The Venus fly trap actually moves to catch its prey, or parts of it do anyway. Its leaves, it has special leaves that are hinged in the middle. The two halves of the leaf open and close, sort of like a mouth to catch insects and on these leaves is sweet nectar that attracts insects. Insects like this sweet stuff, and when they get lured in and land on the leaf, well, the leaves spring shut. It's an active trap and the insect springs it so to speak. The leaves quickly closes and forms a little cage trapping the insect between the leaves. The Venus fly trap is then able to digest the insect and get its nutrients. But other carnivorous plants, their methods are passive they don't have any moving parts to trap things, they have passive traps, like the sundew plant. The sundew plant also produces a sweet nectar that attracts insects. Its leaves are full of little hairs that secrete the sweet substance. But what happens when insects land on the sundew's leaves to get at this sweet nectar? Well, unfortunately for the insects, the hairs on the leaves also produce a super sticky glue like substance so an insect gets stuck in them and can't fly away. It basically gets glued there, allowing the sundew to digest it and absorb nutrients.
TPO24
Task 3 I don't like his proposal.
Why not? There are never many students in there.
But that's what I like about it. That it's never crowded.
Really?
Yeah, so it's a great place to study. I go there a lot. I'll read a book or bring my laptop computer and work on a paper for class. It's never very noisy.
You are able to get work done there?
Absolutely. In fact, I actually prefer it to the library as a place to study. And a lot of other students do too. We even study for our final exams there. And you can eat there while you work, something you can't do at the library.
Okay, but you don't actually like the food there, do you? I mean, he said..
Well, I don't think he has been there recently. I mean it's true that it wasn't that great in the past, but I think it's a lot better now.
What's changed?
They have a new manager, and I guess she's made some improvements in the quality of the food. I was there last week and the food was delicious.
Really?
Yeah, really. And the new manager has also added a lot of really healthy foods and snacks. So the food does not just taste good now, it is good for you, too.
En, I'll have to try the place.
Task 4 So one example of this is the macaw, the great green macaw, now the great green macaw is a beautiful bird, a fairly large sized parrot known for its colorful feathers. Gorgeous green feathers with some red and blue feathers, too. The macaw lives in the South American rainforest in a part of the rainforest where a lot of trees have been cut down. Trees that the macaw relies on for its food and nesting. So the macaw was in trouble, and of course along with the trees, a lot of other animals were in trouble, too. Lots of birds, bats and frogs also lived in these trees. So when the trees were cut down and cleared away. These animals also didn't have a place to live in any more. And their populations drastically declined. So what a concerned group of people in the area did was they started spreading the word about how the macaw you know this really beautiful bird needed help, they made little books with information about the macaw. With pictures, full colored pictures of the macaw that showed off its beautiful feathers. And they passed out these little books these information brochures, they distribute them to people in schools and community centers in the area. And a lot of people responded, they contributed money and helped the group set up some protected land, a special area where no one could cut down the trees. So the macaw would be safe. And the macaw 's population started to increase and other birds and bats and frogs came back to the area too. Their numbers increased along with the trees.
Task 5 Hey, Amy, have you finished moving out of your dorm room yet?
Yeah, I am all done. I moved into my new apartment off campus yesterday.
How do you like it?
It's great. There is just one problem.
What's that?
Well, I don't have an Internet connection at my new apartment so I can't use the computer to access the Internet from my room.
And that's really important.
Right. I need it to do research for classes, email people, stuff like that. I use it almost every day.
So are you going to pay to get it installed at the apartment?
Well, I have called a couple of the Internet companies in the area and it's no trouble for them to send someone to my apartment to install Internet service. It's just the cost, I'd have to pay every month for the service.
Well, you know, there is always the computer center on campus, the computers there have free Internet access, couldn't you use them?
I could, it's just that I don't have classes every day, so I'd have to go to campus on some days just to use the Internet. And that computer center can get crowded sometimes.
En..
So I am not sure what to do.
Task 6 Authors of fiction, short stories and novels, of course have many decisions to make when they are writing their works. One of those decisions is how they are going to narrate or tell the story, what perspective or what point of view the story will be told from. So authors need to choose a type of narrator. Some person or voice to tell the story and this narrator can affect the readers' experience when they read the story. Now the author might choose to have an objective narrator. And an objective narrator can describe what people, the characters in the story, what they do and what they say, but that's about all. So suppose we have a story, for example, that's about a man and a woman about to take a trip. When the story is told by an objective narrator, the only information that we get as readers is what the characters say to each other what they do.
They get on the train, they sit down, they look out the window. That's all. And this leaves questions that force the reader to interpret the events, to fill in information and decide what the characters' conversation and actions might mean. Another kind of narrator that an author might use is an omniscient narrator. In this case, the narrator, the voice that is telling the story, knows everything, and I mean everything about the characters, so let's imagine our same man and woman traveling, but described by an omniscient narrator, not only do we, the readers know what they do and say, but we also know what they are thinking, for example, we are told that the couple is going to visit an old friend of the man's and we learn what the man is thinking. That he is nervous, because he hasn't seen his friend in a long time. That he is worried if his wife will like the friend.
So an omniscient narrator provides more information and answers questions that the reader might have about the characters or the action.
TPO25
Task 1 Students often want to get better grades in their classes. Explain what students should do in order to improve their performance in a class.
Task 2 Some people do not enjoy shopping and shop only when they have a specific purchase to make. Others like to go shopping for pleasure whether or not they have something to buy. Which do you prefer and why?
Task 3 Reading Time: 45 seconds Split Graduation Traditionally, the university holds one ceremony for all graduating students, during which students are awarded their diplomas. Beginning this year, hoWe'ver, the university will hold two graduation ceremonies.
Under the new arrangement, half the graduating students will participate in the first ceremony, and the other will participate in a second ceremony to be held the following day. Administrators cite two reasons for the change. First, the number of students has increased in recent years, and since diplomas are awarded individually, the single ceremony has become uncomfortably long. Also, the hall where the ceremony is held is too small to accommodate the growing audience of friends and family members.
----- Narrator Now listen to two students discussing the article.
Female Student You know, I wish they wouldn't do this.
Male Student Why?
Female Student Well, I think it's unnecesary. I mean, as far as the first reason goes, yeah, sure, it takes a long time to have everyone receive their diploma individually, especially now that there are more students. But there is an easy way to make it shorter.
Male Student What's that?
Female Student Reduce the number of speeches. I mean, a lot of people give speeches, students, professors, administrators, the president of the university. Do we really need that many speeches?
Male Student Probably not. And a lot of the speeches are pretty boring anyway. So yeah, we probably could cut out a few.
Female Student Yeah. And I don't think their second reason is really good either, about the space.
Male Student How's that?
Female Student The problem isn't the size of the hall, is that they allow students to invite too many people to come and watch. All they need to do is reduce the number of guests each graduating student gets to invite.
Male Student Yeah, I guess that could solve the problem.
Female Student Yeah. I mean, right now each graduating student can invite up to ten people, that's too many. At most schools, students only get to invite like four or five people. If we just say, 'OK, you can only invite six people.” That is still be more than most other schools and the ceremony could stay the way it is.
The woman expresses her opinion about the university's plan. Briefly summarize the plan. Then state her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion.
Task 4 Reading Time: 45 seconds Cultural Lag Technological change occurs very rapidly in modern society-sometimes more rapidly than many people are prepared for. As a result, when new technology emerges, people may struggle for a time to adapt to it. This period of transition, when people are adjusting to technological change, is known as cultural lag. At first, people are not accustomed to the new technology and may not understand it, they may therefore have a negative attitude toward it. Over time, hoWe'ver, their attitudes change, and they successfully incorporate the new technology into their daily lives.
Narrator Now listen to part of a lecture from a sociology class.
Professor Now, the invention of the telephone was revolutionary. It was a much easier and faster way of communicating than anything else available of the time. HoWe'ver, when the telephone first became widely available towards the end of the nineteenth century, only businesses used telephones because businesses realized how telephone could benefit them, how it could help them be more productive. But a lot of people in the general public didn't think the phone should be used for personal communication. Some people didn' t like to listen to someone's voice without being able to see them. Also, a lot of people thought that it was rude to call someone on the telephone instead of visting them in person. They missed the sense of personal connection they got from meeting someone.
HoWe'ver, as we all know, people gradually changed their minds about the telephone. It took about thirty years. But eventually, most homes came to have telephones and everyone came to depend on them. Talking to someone you couldn't see began to seem more and more normal. Friends began to call each other just to chat, just for fun. And after everyone agreed on certain rules of politeness, such as not calling someone late at night, no one consider it rude anymore to make personal phone calls.
Using the example of the telephone, explain the concept of cultural lag.
Task 5 Narrator Listen to a conversation between two students.
Female Student Hey, Frank. How is it going?
Male Student Well, I just found out my roommate Jim is moving out of our off-campus apartment into a bigger place with a whole bunch of friends next semester.
Female Student Oh, really?
Male Student Yeah.
Female Student Does this mean you will be living by yourself next semester?
Male Student Yeah, but that's OK, 'cause I really wanted to live alone next semester anyway. I have to concentrate on my senior project for the history department. I have a lot to write and I don't want any distractions. The only major problem though, is how I'll be getting to campus.
Female Student Oh, yeah?
Male Student See, the apartment is a little far from campus and Jim has a car and he gives me rides to and from campus everyday, but I can't afford a car now.
Female Student So have you thought about taking public transportation? Uh, the bus to campus?
Male Student Yeah, I have. The thing is that there's no bus going directly to the campus from that part of town. I'll have to change buses a couple of times on the way.
Female Student I see. That could take a lot of time.
Male Student Right.
Female Student Hmmm... Well, maybe you should move back into a dormitory on campus, request a single room. There's lots of them.
Male Student Yeah. I thought about that. You know, I could live alone to get my work done. But I don't know, I would miss my apartment.
Female Student I know, but you've got to make some choice.
Briefly summarize the problem the speakers are discussing. Then state which of the two solutions from the conversation you would recommend. Explain the reasons for your recommendation.
Task 6 Narrator Listen to part of a lecture in a geology class.
Professor Rocks near the Earth's surface are directly exposed to elements in the environment such as air and water, and also to conditions such as temperature change, as well as to living organisms. And this exposure to the environment can actually cause even huge rocks to break into smaller pieces. This process is called weathering. Uh, let's talk about a couple of ways weathering occurs.
First of all, rocks are often exposed to water. In cold, wet environments, rocks can break due to water freezing inside of them. How does this happen? Well, 'cause I am sure you know, when water freezes, it expands.
And over time, this can lead to weathering. Um... imagine a rock with a small opening or crack in it. It rains, and water gets into the crack and stays there. Then at night, the temperature drops. And the water inside the crack freezes. This growing expanding ice pushes outward on either side of the crack, causing it to get slightly bigger. When this happens again and again, the crack becomes larger. And eventually, pieces of the rock break off.
OK. Weathering can also be caused by plants, by plant growth. If a plant seed gets blown into the crack of a rock, it may take root. And its roots will grow down into the rock. The plant roots can cause the rock to break down, uh, fracture. You may have seen this with large trees growing on top of a rock, a great example of this.
Usually there is enough dirt in the crack of a rock or on top of a rock to allow a tree to start growing there. As the tree grows over the years, the tree's roots extend down well into the cracks and crevasses of the rock in search of water and nutrients. Over time, the roots get bigger and grow deeper, widening and enlarging the cracks, causing the rock to break apart.
Using points and example from the lecture, explain two ways weathering occurs.
TPO26
Task3 Advisor Meetings Should No Longer Be Required Narrator Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
Male Student Did you see this letter?
Female Student Yeah. Why?
Male Student Well, I don't agree. It's definitely not the same thing to just go on the university's website.
Female Student You don't think so?
Male Student No. I mean, sure, the basic information is there. But that's not all advisors help you with. Sometimes there are different ways you can meet the requirement for graduation, like different classes you can take. And if you talk to someone, they can help you figure it out.
Female Student And you can't get that from just reading what's on the website.
Male Student Right. Advisors have a lot of extra information, so they make it easier for you to see what your choices are.
Female Student I see what you mean.
Male Student And as for scheduling meetings, I have never had that kind of trouble.
Female Student Me either.
Male Student So anyone who does have problems must be waiting until the last minute to set something up.
Female Student That's possible.
Male Student I mean, the thing is, if you call or go to the office early enough to set up an appointment, schedules are open.
It's just if you wait till the last possible day, it would be harder 'cause they already have lots of students.
Task4 -Epiphytes Narrator Now listen to part of a lecture from a biology class.
Professor OK. So a good example of this type of plant common to the rain forest is the urn plant.
The urn plant wraps its roots around the branches of the trees or sometimes around the trunk near the upper part of the tree. They use the trees for support. And this allows them to reside high in the trees, in the canopy, where they can get plenty of sunlight.
Now, the urn plant has an unique shape. It got its name because the formation of its leaves creates a kind of urn or bowl where it can store water. The urn plant has rather long stiff spiky leaves. The leaves are slightly overlapping and are tightly rolled into a kind of cone shape or a funnel shape. Its flowers are held on a single stem in the center. Anyway, as I mentioned, the arrangement of the leaves forms a kind of receptacle or bowl at the base, so that as rain water collects on the leaves, it rolls down into the bowl, where it can be stored.
OK. So its unique shape helps it gather and store water, it also helps it to gather other nutrients. This is because insects, dead leaves from other plants or other debris land on the leaves and then get washed down into the stored water. Gradually, they decompose, the chemical breakdown creates a nitrogen-rich food source in the stored water. So the water supply contains a kind of liquid fertilizer, that can be released to the plant whenever it needs it.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epiphyte Task5 Conversation Female Student Hey, Steve. I hear you started a band.
Male Student Yeah. I play guitar and some friends and I got together to start making music. We have been practicing a couple of month. And I think we are ready to have a concert.
Female Student Great. Are you gonna have the show soon?
Male Student Yeah. Hopefully some time in the next couple weeks. We are all pretty busy. But I think we can squeeze in a show before summer starts and everyone goes away.
Female Student Cool. Where is it gonna be?
Male Student We want to do it in the campus auditorium. We play Rock and Roll. It's kind of loud. So it would sound great in there. Problem is, the auditorium is already booked for the next few weekends.
Female Student So what are you going to do?
Male Student Well, there are no weekends left before summer. But there's an opening next Wednesday night. We could do the show then.
Female Student That could be good. I mean, concerts are usually on weekends. But it would be something fun for people to do in the middle of the week.
Male Student Yeah. That's true. It's just that ... well, there will probably a smaller audience on a Wednesday, which might be kind of disappointing.
Female Student Well, yeah.
Male Student But there is one other option. We are friends with the people in another band. They are going to be performing in the auditorium next Saturday. And they actually said they will be willing to let us perform with them.
Female Student Wow. That's very nice of them.
Male Student Yeah. We'd play for a little while, and then they'd play for the rest of the night as scheduled.
Female Student Sounds good.
Male Student Yeah. Only catch is: we wouldn't have much time to perform, so we wouldn't be able to do all the songs.
Task6 Narrator Listen to part of a lecture from a business class.
Professor When consumers are buying a product, most of the time they are not buying just the product itself. They are also buying the container the product comes in. So the design of the container is very important. It can be the deciding factor when consumers are trying to decide which brand of a product to buy. So let's talk about a couple of ways product containers can be designed to appeal to consumers.
One important design goal is to make the container as user-friendly as possible, as convenient to use as possible. Take, for example, when companies started using plastic containers for condiments, such as ketchup, mustard and mayonnaise. In the past, these products came in glass containers with lids you had to screw off. And then you had to either pour the ketchup or mustard on your food, which could be messy., or scoop it out with a spoon. But flexible plastic containers were much more convenient to use. And so they were more attractive to consumers. You just held the container over your food, gave it a little squeeze and out came the ketchup or mustard, uh, much faster and easier than having to remove a lid first.
Another important design goal is to give the container a pleasing appearance, so that consumers will feel comfortable displaying it in their home. Take, for example, a company that sells cookies. Instead of selling their cookies in a plain cardboard box, they might sell them in a nice metal box and they might decorate that nice metal box with beautiful pictures of some kind. That way, when consumers present the cookies to guests, for example, they look nice, they look classy. Attractive containers like that can make a product much more appealing.
TPO27
Task 3 Switch to Electronic Books Conversation Woman Oh, no! Did you see this?
Man Yeah, why? You don't like the idea?
Woman Not at all.
Man How come?
Woman Well the cost for one thing. They are just not being realistic.
Man Even compared to the price of textbooks?
Woman Well, sure, textbooks aren't cheap. But do you think people are only gonna use one device the whole time they're at university? What happens if yours breaks, you'll have to buy a new one. Or they come out with some fancy new features. Wouldn't you want to get a new one then?
Man Yeah, I see what you mean. A lot of people would probably want to replace theirs with the latest version.
Woman Right. Maybe even every year and that can add up.
Man True. But don't you agree it'll make studying and preparing for classes a lot easier?
Woman I don't think everybody is going to think it's so great.
Man What do you mean?
Woman Well, it's only helpful if it's easy to use. And well, this thing is pretty small, it's only about 18 or 20 centimeters tall.
Man Oh, really? So that means the screen is pretty small.
Woman And I heard that the keypad or control buttons … they are small too. So if you have normal size fingers. It's no that easy to select an item or get it to function right. You know, to do stuff like highlighting or underlining.
Man I hadn't thought of that.
Woman So what good are those fancy features if it's hard to use them? Besides I like the old fashion way of studying the material, writing notes on the page and underlining or highlighting important sections of the book. I am more comfortable with that.
Task 4 Swarm Intelligence Narrator Now listen to a lecture on this topic in a biology class.
Professor OK. We can see a great example of this with ants. Ants live in large groups called colonies. They normally move together to get to food sources. And sometimes when ants are moving toward a food source, they'll encounter or find an obstacle in their path. So for instance, let's say a large number of ants are walking on a tree toward some food on a branch. But when they reach the end of the branch they are walking on, there's a wide space between that branch and the next one, the branch with the food on it. Now, none of these ants alone can cross this wide space to get to the other branch with the food. So how do they solve this problem?
Here's how. One ant walks forward until it reaches the end of the branch and then it automatically holds onto the branch with its back legs. Then it stretches its body forward into the open space. Now, this comes naturally to ants and it's a simple action. So then the next ant walks to the end of the branch and right across the first ant's body. Then it holds on to the first ant and then it stretches its body out into the open space, just a little bit closer to the branch with the food on it. Then one after another, other ants do the same thing, until enough ants connect together to form a bridge between the two branches. Pretty amazing, huh?
The connected ants hold this position, allowing the rest of the ants in the group to cross over this bridge of ants to reach the food.
Task 5 A Scheduling Conflict Narrator Listen to a conversation between two English professors.
Male Professor Hi, Nancy. Is something the matter?
Female Professor Oh. I just realized I've got a scheduling conflict tomorrow.
Male Professor What is it?
Female Professor Well, the poetry class I am teaching meets at four o'clock. My students have a test next week, so tomorrow's class is the review session. It's important.
Male Professor OK.
Female Professor But the other thing is my cousin's retirement party. But I just realized it also starts at four o'clock. I hadn't realized it was starting at the exact same time as my class.
Male Professor Oh, no. Well, I am free tomorrow at four. If you want, I could cover your class for you, lead the review session.
Female Professor Really? What a generous offer! Male Professor I wouldn't mind. I mean, I haven't taught poetry in a few years. I am a little rusty.
Female Professor Well, I have some materials prepared and you could certainly use them. So it might be tough, but could do it.
Male Professor I'd try anyway.
Female Professor Well, my other option is to go to the class, do the review session myself and arrive late to the retirement party.
Male Professor So you could prepare your students for the test yourself.
Female Professor I could. And I know it would be good for my students. It's just that I would miss a lot of the party. My cousin and some others are giving speeches and I think they'll be very interesting. It would be a shame to miss it.
Task 6 Advanced Technology of Roman Cities Narrator Listen to part of a lecture in a history class.
Professor So, most cities of the ancient world tended to be small, often limited to the banks of a river. They had very little means to expand. These old cities couldn't really cross natural barriers like rivers or be located very far from water sources. But Roman cities on the other hand, grew much larger. How did this happen?
Well, for one thing, the Romans had more advanced technology. Let's look at a couple of Roman developments that allowed their city to expand.
One development that allowed Roman city to grow was their advanced building materials. The Romans developed a special kind of concrete, a building material that would harden underwater. And this concrete made new kinds of structures possible. Take their bridges for example. Because of this special concrete, they could build better bridges, bridges that could go across wide rivers, bridges that were big enough to transport equipment and materials with wagons and carts. So with these strong bridges, Roman cities could grow on both sides of the river, creating larger cities than would have been possible otherwise.
Another development that helped Roman cities expand was an improved way to move fresh clean water.
People need the access to freshwater. And the Romans created an especially creative way to bring it to them.
They built structures called aqueducts. Now, aqueducts are a series of open channels, waterways the stretched from water sources high in the mountains to cities. They were carefully planned and built so that a steady drop in altitude provided a steady flow of water to cities. These aqueducts could move a tremendous amount of water over great distances and even bring freshwater to places far from rivers. Because of this, people could have clean water for drinking and bathing without being located near a river. So cities were able to grow larger, in new locations.
TPO28
Task 3 Keep the Music Building Open Later Narrator Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
Woman Jim. Did you see this letter in the paper today?
Man Yeah. I did.
Woman That would be great for us music students. Because I mean, what happens is, students end up practicing in their dorm rooms because they don't have anywhere else they can go.
Man Yeah. I have done that myself a bunch of times playing my violin.
Woman Me too. And I always feel kind of bad about it because even if you try to keep the volume down, it's still pretty noisy. And other students are nearby in their rooms trying to sleep or study.
Man That's true.
Woman And we really could use some more time slots, especially just before the big concerts, the winter concert and the spring concert, because everybody from all sections of the orchestra needs to practice then.
Man I know. I tried to make a reservation to practice before the winter concert, but I couldn't because other people in the orchestra had already booked every single time slot.
Woman Exactly. So this would really help.
Task 4 Refute-and-Persuade Narrator Now listen to part of a lecture in a business class.
Professor All right. So I actually saw a good example of this just the other day. I watched an advertisement on television for a well-known company's pots and pans. And in the advertisement, there was a woman, a professional cook, talking about how she uses the company's pots and pans in her own kitchen.
Now, the woman in the advertisement began by saying that this company's pots and pans were expensive.
She just came right out and admitted it to the audience that they cost a lot more than most other companies' pots and pans. And she also said she realized it when people went shopping for a new cookware, they might feel that they just didn't want to spend all that money on such expensive pots and pans since there were so many others in the store that cost a lot less.
But then she went on to explain that the extra cost was worthwhile because although these pots and pans cost more to begin with, they actually save you money in the long run. How? Well, they came with a special lifetime warranty, which meant the company would replace them free if anything ever went wrong. And that's something most companies that make pots and pans couldn't say about their products.
Task 5 Narrator Listen to a conversation between two students.
Woman Hey. Mike. Did you finish that article you were writing for the campus newspaper? The one about the school play.
Man Not yet. Remember how I was going to interview the student who's directing it?
Woman Yeah. You said that was going to be a big part of the article.
Man Right. And I was going to make most of my article about what the director said, since she knows about picking the play, choosing the cast, designing the set, everything. But I just called and it turns out she's got a bad cold. She is sick.
Woman So you can't interview her?
Man Not today. No. But I have a couple of options. I could wait until she feels better and interview her then. It's just that then the article wouldn't be done in time to go in this week's paper.
Woman Oh. So you'll have to put it in next week's paper then?
Man Yeah. And the play is opening this weekend. I mean it's running next weekend too but it'd make more sense to have the article come out before the play opens.
Woman I see what you mean. So what's your other option?
Man Well, I could interview an actor instead of the director. I talked to one of the lead actors and he said he would be happy to do an interview today.
Woman Sounds good. Then your article would come out before the play opens.
Man I know. But it's just that he probably wouldn't have as much to say as the director. I mean, he wouldn't know about everything that went into planning the play the way the director does.
Task 6 Narrator Listen to part of a lecture from a geology class.
Professor So when we look at lakes, they seem to be permanent. We assume they'll be around forever. But in fact, lakes aren't permanent. They can actually disappear. Sometimes they disappear through natural processes, and sometimes because of human activities.
First, let's look at one way lakes can disappear naturally, and that is by gradually getting filled in with organic sediment. This often happens with lakes that have lots of plants growing in them. When the plants die, they break down into a muddy substance, which falls to the bottom of the lake. They are then replaced by new plants, which eventually also die and fall to the bottom. And over the years, all this dead plant material builds up on the bottom of the lake. And as it builds up, it starts to fill up the lake and there's less and less room left for water. And eventually, the lake gets completely filled in and disappears. OK.
And lakes can also disappear pretty rapidly sometimes as a result of human activities. For example, we know that farmers need water to irrigate their crops. And sometimes to get that water, they pump the water out of the nearby lake. They install pipes that run from the lake to their farms and they pump the water out of the lake and into their fields. That's okay if the lake is continually being refilled with rainwater or with water from streams that run into the lake. But if there isn't enough rainwater or stream water to replace the water the farmers take out of the lake, the lake will eventually dry up.
TPO29
Task 3 Remove old Bicycles from Campus Racks Narrator Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
Woman He's totally right about this you know.
Man Well, I agree they should do it, but maybe it's not fair.
Woman What? Just assuming no one wants them? Well, judging from the conditions some of them are in, I think it's probably a safe assumption. I mean, some are missing parts like handle bars or wheels and others are really rusty like they've been left outside in the rain for years.
Man Yeah. The ones with missing parts sure don't look like they are being used, but what if some are?
Woman Well, to be sure, the university could always attach notes to them and say give the owners two weeks to remove them or they'll be removed by campus security.
Man Yeah. That'd probably work.
Woman Anyway, it'd be a really big help if they were gone.
Man Oh, I know.
Woman Because I mean, especially like in front of the dining hall, there are lots of them there and it can be really hard to find a space. All the spaces are always taken there.
Man Yeah. It's bad. Lots of people ride bikes these days.
Woman And since the university doesn't allow us to tie them to sign posts or fences or anything like that to park them, I always have to lock mine up at another building and walk over to the dining hall 'cause there's hardly ever a space.
Task 4 Scatter Hoarding Narrator Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic in a biology class.
Professor OK. So we sometimes see this with animals that live in parts of the world where it gets very cold in the winter.
For example, in the Northeastern United States, there's a species of squirrel that does this.
This squirrel, like many species of squirrel, loves to eat nuts. Nuts are one of its primary sources of food. Now, nuts are very difficult to find in the winter, but in the autumn they're lying all over the place because that's when they fall from the trees. So what this squirrel does is: in the autumn, it spends a lot of time finding nuts.
After it finds a nut, it prepares it. It takes off the outer shell and cleans it. This preparation may in some way help preserve the nut and… or may make it easier to eat later on. The squirrel then digs a little hole in the ground and buries the nut. In one autumn, this squirrel may bury hundreds of nuts. But it doesn't just dig a big hole and put all the nuts in it and cover them up. No. It digs hundreds of holes all over the place and it puts just one nut in each hole.
Now, why would it do that? Well, probably, primarily because even if other animals happen to find some of the holes, some of the nuts, the squirrel will still have a lot of other holes with nuts in them. So it'll still have enough food to survive the winter.
Task 5 Narrator Listen to a conversation between two students.
Man How is it going, Mary? Weren't you away this past weekend?
Woman Yeah. I flew out to see my family in Boston for the weekend. Just got back from the airport actually, what a mess! My flight was delayed several hours because of bad weather.
Man Oh. Yeah. There was that big storm out east. huh?
Woman Right. So I was at the airport like all night waiting for my flight to leave. I am supposed to arrive back to campus last night. But instead, I got in early this morning.
Man You must be exhausted.
Woman I am. I hardly got any sleep, just a short nap on the plane. And I am supposed to …I can't believe it! I am supposed to give a presentation in my history class today, an hour from now.
Man What kind of presentation?
Woman It's a ten-minute presentation on a paper I wrote, and then there's an answer…a question and answer session afterward, where the professor and other students ask me questions about my history paper and stuff.
Man Well, I bet if you told your professor what happened, how the flight was delayed and you didn't get any sleep. I bet your professor would let you do the presentation on a different day.
Woman Yeah, she would probably let me reschedule. I just don't know if I want to put it off. I've got a lot of other stuff coming up, big assignments.
Man Oh.
Woman I could just give the presentation today, I mean, I did prepare for it a lot last week, so I don't know… maybe I should just grab a cup of coffee or something and go through with it.
Man Well, if you feel okay with that.
Woman Well, I am definitely tired. I wouldn't as quick or sharp as I normally am, but I've got an hour to go over my notes and the coffee … Task 6 Narrator Listen to part of a lecture in a business class.
Professor OK. So of course businesses want to sell as many of their products as possible. Often a business sells mostly one type of product. But sales of this product may stop increasing because most potential customers have already bought it. In this situation, many companies will try to diversify, um…to develop new or diverse products in order to increase sales. There are a couple of efficient ways that a company can diversify using some of their existing resources.
One way a company can diversify is to use an existing technology…uh, technology that they already have, to develop a new product. If a company already has the machines and technology to make a certain product, sometimes it can efficiently use that same technology to make a different product. For example, a company that makes televisions might start making computer monitors because the technology used to make these two products is very similar. So the company can use its existing technological resources to make the monitors. But with the monitors, it can reach new customers, people that wouldn't buy television screens, like businesses that need to buy monitors for their employees' computers.
Another way a company can diversify is to try to appeal to its existing customers, its customer base, with a new product. One of a company's most important resources is its existing customers and these customers might have other needs that the company could fulfill with a different product. For example, a company that sells skis might have a large customer base that enjoys winter sports, like skiing down snowy mountains. So they might start making ski jackets. That same customers that buy skis would also need warm ski jackets to wear while they are skiing. And since they like the company's skis, they might be more likely to buy the jackets with the company's name on them.
TPO30
Task 3 Campus Construction Should Happen During the Summer Narrator Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
Man So, Jane, what do you think of Eric's proposal?
Woman I am all for it.
Man So you think it's true? What he says about the problems with the way it's been done?
Woman Well, yeah. I do. Take his first reason. Like I know you don't drive, but I do drive here everyday, so I need a place to park my car. And remember last year when they decided to repair some of the parking lots?
Man Oh, yeah. I remember that. There was a lot of work going on, wasn't there? Starting in December.
Woman Right. At least four lots were closed. And that meant there weren't enough parking spots for students' and professors' cars. I usually had to circle around looking for parking on one of the streets, and then walked from the street all the way to my classes.
Man That's annoying.
Woman Yeah. And it happened to a lot of other people in my classes too. People were always arriving late because of all the trouble they had parking. Sometimes even my professors were late.
Man Yeah.
Woman And also, his second point, that makes sense too. I mean, for instance, part of the reason those parking lot repairs last year took so long was because of the big snowstorms. They had to keep stopping, sometimes for a week or two at a time because of snow and ice on the ground.
Man Yeah, I remember that. We had a bunch of big snowstorms right in a row last year.
Woman So with all the starting and stopping because of the weather, the job took them a lot longer to finish.
Task 4 Emotional Intelligence Narrator Now listen to part of a lecture in a psychology class.
Professor So here's an example. My daughter had a friend over to our house recently and they decided to watch a movie together, only they got into an argument because they couldn't agree on what movie to watch. My daughter started to get quite upset during the argument, which wasn't like her at all.
But then my daughter stopped and thought about why she was so upset, she realized her reaction was inappropriate and she also realized she wasn't really upset with her friend. There was something else bothering her. You see, she'd just gotten a summer job as a camp counselor for children and she was feeling a lot of worry and stress about how well she would do since she'd never worked with children before. So she figured out that she wasn't upset about what movie to watch with her friend, but about starting her new job. She really wanted it to go well. She wanted the kids to like her. And when she understood this, she stopped arguing with her friend and apologized to her.
She told her friend how anxious she felt about starting the job and how sorry she was about getting upset with her. And her friend encouraged her saying she'd do great at the job, so my daughter felt better. And they relaxed and had fun together, the same as always.
Task 5 Narrator Listen to a conversation between two students.
Man Hey. Julie, what's up?
Woman Oh, hi, George, I am just waiting for my friend Amy. We are supposed to drive into town together to see a film at one of the movie theaters there.
Man Sounds great.
Woman Yeah. Our professor for film class wants us to go see it. It is a film by one of the directors we are studying and we'll be discussing the film next week in class.
Man Cool. Yeah.
Woman But I am the one with the car and we were supposed to leave like fifteen minutes ago. And Amy hasn't showed up. She is really late. If we don't leave in like the next few minutes, we are going to miss the beginning of the movie.
Man Have you tried calling her?
Woman Yeah. I've called her several times and left voice mails. And she hasn't responded to any of my messages.
So anyway, I don't know what I should do.
Man Well, I know Amy is your friend and everything, but if you need to see the film and you have already been waiting fifteen minutes for her, I mean, maybe you should just go by yourself.
Woman You mean, just leave now without her? Yeah, I guess she could see it another time. They are showing the film again tomorrow, so Amy could still go see it then. But I'll be busy tomorrow, so I need to go today.
Man Yeah, so maybe you could just leave Amy a voice mail saying that you had to leave without her.
Woman That's true. But …I don't know. Maybe I should just wait ten more minutes and go late to the film. She might be on her way over here right now. She did mention that she had a lot of other things to do first before she met me. And besides, Amy is often late for stuff.
Man But if you wait another ten minutes for her, you'll miss the beginning of the movie, right?
Woman Yup! Task 6 Subsurface Locomotion Narrator Listen to part of a lecture from a biology class.
Professor When we humans walk from place to place, we move on the Earth's surface, across the Earth's surface.
Many animals of course, do the same thing, horses and dogs and cows and so on, all move on the surface, across the surface of the Earth.
But there are also quite a few animals that have the ability to move from place to place underground, beneath the Earth's surface. This moving around underground is known as subsurface locomotion.
Subsurface locomotion has a number of benefits.
One benefit of subsurface locomotion is that it enables animals to minimize their exposure to extreme temperatures. This is very helpful for animals that live in areas with harsh climates, where it could be very dangerous to spend large amounts of time on the surface. For example, in the Sahara desert in Africa, there's a type of lizard that's able to move beneath the surface, through the sand very quickly. Because this lizard can move so easily and so quickly underground, it doesn't have to travel on the surface, where it would be exposed to dangerously high temperatures.
Another benefit of subsurface locomotion is that it can help animals capture prey. That's because animals on the surface can't see predators that are approaching underground. Our lizard in the Sahara desert is again a good example. The way it works is, when an insect is walking nearby on the surface, it produces very subtle vibrations in the sand. When the lizard senses these vibrations, it moves very quickly underground where it can't be seen towards the source of the vibrations. It then suddenly pops up right under the insect and catches it completely by surprise.
TPO31
Task 3-Students Need Access to Movie Collection Narrator Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
Female Student What do you think?
Male Student I don't think we need to change anything.
Female Student You don't think she is right that it would be easier?
Male Student Well, I just don't think it's that difficult now. I mean, the library has a really good computer system where you can easily see what they have in their collection, see what's available and what's not.
Female Student Yeah. You can always look through the titles on the library computers.
Male Student Right. And you don't even have to have an exact title in mind. I mean, you can just look for certain types of movies or movies with certain actors or whatever.
Female Student Good point.
Male Student And as far as what she said about the staff, the people who do that work are students who really need the money to pay for books and stuff.
Female Student True.
Male Student Plus, I am sure those students don't get paid that much to do the work. So I don't think it's going to put any strain on the university's budget.
Task 4-Mental Accounting Narrator Now listen to part of a lecture in a psychology class.
Professor So a good example of this is something that happened to me. When I was younger, I had an office job and I worked there every day during the week. And I made a regular salary from that. But also I worked as a waiter at a restaurant each weekend, so I made some money from doing that.
Now, around this time, I decided I wanted to buy a house. So every time I got my regular paycheck from my job at the office, I'd save as much of the money from it as I could after I bought the basic stuff I needed. But with the money I made as a waiter that was another story. Somehow I guess that money seemed separate from the money I earned at my regular job. So I used the money I made at the restaurant to go out to dinner, to buy videos or CDs, things I didn't really need.
But the thing is, it ended up taking me a really long time to save up all the money I needed to buy the house.
And looking back now, I realize I could have bought the house a lot sooner if only I had saved more of the money I made working at the restaurant.
Task 5-Picking up Grandma & Review Session Narrator Listen to a conversation between two students.
Male Student Hey. Lin. What's up?
Female Student Oh. Just getting ready for my grandmother to come to town. She is flying in tomorrow to visit me for a few days at school.
Male Student Oh. Yeah. Is she going to stay at your apartment?
Female Student Yeah. It would be good. We can spend some time together and I can show her around campus and stuff.
Male Student Sounds nice.
Female Student Yeah. I am looking forward to it. But I am not sure what to do about picking her up fromthe airport.
Male Student What do you mean?
Female Student Well, her flight gets in tomorrow. But the problem is, my biology professor scheduled a special review session…uh…for an upcoming biology exam at the same time I am supposed to pick her up. I didn't know there'd be this conflict.
Male Student Oh. Well, how important is the review session? Do you think you can miss it to pick your grandmother up?
Female Student It's optional. But this professor's review sessions are usually really helpful, he does a good job going over what's going to be on the exam. So it would be good to go, but… maybe I'll have to miss it.
Male Student Is there something else you could do?
Female Student Yeah. Actually I spoke with my friend Mary and she offered to pick my grandma up from the airport.
Male Student Great. Why don't you do that then?
Female Student Maybe. But Mary doesn't even know my grandmother. And I don't know how grandma would feel about being picked up by a stranger. She'd probably be more comfortable being picked up by me.
Male Student Oh. Well… Task 6-Arctic Animals Narrator Listen to part of a lecture in a Biology class.
Professor Even though it's cold and snow-covered, the Arctic houses many species of animals that manage to survive the harsh conditions there. These Arctic animals have adapted to the extremely cold temperatures primarily because of certain body features that help them to survive in the cold Arctic climate. Let's look at a few of them.
For one thing, many Arctic animals have developed a protective covering on their feet. The covering usually consists of fur or feathers which act as a protective layer between the cold and the animals' skin. Since they spend so much of their time on snowy, icy surfaces, whether they are standing on the ground or swimming in the water, they can easily lose heat through their feet. This is especially true of Arctic birds. A bird like the Arctic Snowy Owl, for example, has feathers on its body the way other birds do. But unlike most birds, it also has feathers all over its feet. This shields and protects the feet from the icy ground so that very little of the owl's foot actually touches snowy or icy surfaces, which helps its feet to stay warm.
Another physical characteristic that some Arctic animals share is having smaller bodies and smaller, shorter body parts. In other words, their bodies are often more compact than other animals'. And the parts of their bodies that stick out or protrude like the legs, ears or tails are smaller and shorter. And the result is that there is less body surface exposed to the cold air. A great example is the Arctic wolf. Unlike the larger grey wolves that live in warmer climates, Arctic wolves have relatively small, compact bodies that efficiently retain heat.
They also have smaller ears and shorter legs so that they lose less body heat than animals with larger bodies or longer body parts. And in the climate where the temperature is below zero most of the year, that's very important.
TPO32
Task 3-An Airport Bus for School Breaks Did you see this, Jim? What do you think about her idea?
I think it'd be great. It'd make things much less expensive'cause our campus is located outside the city. If you can't get a friend with a car to give you a ride, there is no other way to get to the airport. And your only choice is to take a taxi.
I know. I've had to take a taxi before and it's pretty expensive. Yeah, like thirty or forty dollars which is a lot especially for students. Yeah, definitely And I think it would work what she's suggesting. I mean, there is less need for buses on campus during that time to take students between the buildings.
You mean because classes are over then?
Yeah, exactly, there might some final exams still going on but regular classes won't be meeting. There are much fewer students left on campus and they don't need to get around campus that often.
Yeah, I guess they're just making occasional trips to take exams or go to the library or gym or whatever.
Right, it shouldn't cause any problems for anyone who still needs to get around campus.
Task 4-Choice-SupportiveBias OK, so an example of this from my own life: five or six years ago, I was helping a friend of mine decide on a house to buy. He had been in the market to buy a house and he had it narrowed down to this one house that he was interested in.
What he really liked about this house was it had an excellent location. It was in a great place that was actually in the same part of town where he was working right up the street from his job. So he wouldn't have far to drive to get to work which he really liked.
HoWe'ver, the down side of this house was that it was smaller than what he was hoping to buy. He wanted to buy sort of a big house and this house just wasn't that big. So it was a tough decision. But my friend eventually did decide to buy the house.
And a few years after he made the purchase, I remember, we were talking about the decision and why he decided to buy the house. He told me, well, of course, it was because of the house's location. He told me how happy he was with the fact it was so close to his work, how great it was only few minutes from his job. I said, “Yes, but, what about its size? Do you still think the house is kind of small?”And he looked at me kind of surprised, “Small? What do you mean small?”Like he didn't know what I was talking about. The house's size, a couple of years after buying it, just didn't seem to be on his mind anymore.
Task5-Summer Break I don't know about you, but, I'm really looking forward to summer break.
I can't even think that far ahead. I've got so much to do before the end of the semester. I've been feeling pretty stressed out lately.
Why? What's going on?
Well, I just have so many assignments. I've got three major research papers to do and they all due, basically, at the same time, in two weeks.
Wow! Three? That is a lot. And research papers take a lot of time.
Right, and between my job and classes, there just aren't enough hours in the day to get them all done.
Well, is there anything you could cut from your schedule, I mean, you're working part-time in an office in town, aren't you? Why don't you just reduce your hours there for a while…at least till you get the papers done?
Well, I guess I could tell my boss I need to cut back on my hours for a couple of weeks, uh, but I don't know, I haven't been working there very long. I don't want to make a bad impression by asking for time off already?
What else could you do?
Well, another option is I could get an extension on one of the papers. I asked one of my professors about it, my History professor, and she said it would be OK if I handed the paper in a week late. So, I guess I could just concentrate on getting the other two papers done first Oh, that's great.
Yeah, only she said she'd have to take a few points off the grade for the paper since it would be late, you know, to be fair to the other students.
Oh, that's a drag. So what are you gonna do?
Uh, I don't know yet.
Task6-Roads Roads, paved roads are everywhere and sometimes seem like part of the natural landscape. But, of course, roads are not part of nature and, if fact, road construction can have harmful effects on the environment and seriously impact both animal life and plant life.
One harmful environmental effect of roads is that they contribute to the movement of plant species from one area to another. This causes problem for existing plants, plants already growing in that area because when a new plant species gets into an area where it wasn't growing before, the new plants compete for resources with existing plant life. For example, this happened in California with a weed called the yellow star thistle. What happened was the star thistle's seeds got stuck to the tires of cars driving down the road and the seeds were distributed to new areas. This put the star thistle in competition for natural resources, like water, with the original plant life of the area. That made it harder for the native plants to survive.
Also roads, especially major highways, can act as barriers and divide up an animal's habitat into smaller ones where there is not enough food to support the population. These busy highways, with cars speeding past day and night, act like boundaries that animals are afraid to cross. So they sometimes get shut in on a small piece of land where there isn't enough food to support them. This is a serious problem for animals that need access to large expanse of land to look for food. For example, there are these foxes called Kitfoxes that live in the southwestern United States, They hunt small animals like mice and squirrels which are spread out over large areas of open grasslands. And now, because of these roads, the Kitfox population has declined significantly because now they don't get enough food.
TPO33
Task 3-Bicycle Borrowing Program Hey, did you read that letter? What do you think?
Yeah, I read it. I understand what she's saying but I really don't agree with her suggestions.
How come?
Well, students often need to borrow the bikes for longer periods of time, sometimes a whole day.
What for?
Well, like, to do stuff off-campus, for instance, my friends and I on the weekends, sometimes we like to ride bikes to the state park outside of town and do some hiking there. And it basically takes a whole day. It's night time by the time when we get back.
So if you had less time you wouldn't be able to do that.
Right, and also her other suggestion doesn't seem practical to me.
The card thing?
Yeah, that's not gonna work. What if you want to enter a campus building? Even though you can get into most of the classroom buildings without a card, there are certain buildings on campus where you need to show your card to get in, like the library and dining hall.
Yeah, that's true, so students wouldn't be able to go to any of those places till they got their cards back.
The man expresses his opinion about the proposal described in the letter. Briefly summarize the proposal then state his opinion about the proposal and explain the reasons he gives for holding that opinion.
Task 4-Carrying Capacity OK, so let's talk about what happened to a certain type of insect, a moth, a red-and-black moth that lives in Europe. These moths eat a plant called Ragwort and they live in fields where the Ragwort plants grow. Now, there was a group of moth that lives in one of these fields and, for many years, there was a lot of Ragwort growing there. So the moth had plenty to eat and the total number of moth in the field stayed pretty much the same.
But then one year it rained a lot less than usual and the Ragwort didn't grow as well. The result was that the moth didn't get enough to eat and many didn't survive but even the ones that did survive didn't lay as many eggs as before. So that year the moth population in the field was quite a bit smaller. The next year, though, the amount of rainfall returned to normal and again many more Ragwort plants grew and, once again, there was a lot available for the moth to eat. So that year the moth population increased and the female moth laid many more eggs than the year before.
And now, after all that rainfall and plant growth, there were just as many moth in the Ragwort field as there were before.
Task 5-Dinner Shift Tina, I'm so glad I bump into you.
Hey, Bob, what's up?
Well, you know how I told you I could work for you tonight? Cover you shift at the dining hall later?
Yeah, thanks so much for that. Friday night dinner shifts are tough to find substitutes for.
Well, actually, Oh, no! Don't tell me something came up and you're canceling?
Um, yeah, I'm afraid I forgot tonight I've got a music rehearsal for the bend I'm in.
Music rehearsal?
Yeah, I play keyboards for Little Rock Band here on campus and we've got practice tonight to prepare for a concert we're doing that's coming up. It's really kind of important.
Well, I don't know what to do now because I already made plans to go to the school's play with some friends tonight.
Oh! Yeah, and there's no way I can find someone to work my shift now. It's so last minute.
I'm really sorry, Tina.
Well, I guess I could cancel my plan to see the play. Go see it another time by myself since my friends are seeing it tonight. I think it's playing for another week.
Or, you know, I guess I could talk to the band leader explain to him that I can't make the band practice tonight.
Yeah?
Yeah, I mean, it's my fault I forgot and I want to do the right thing here since I did say I'd work for you.
It's just that some of the songs are new to me and tonight's our last practice before the concert. I don't want to sound bad at the show.
Task 6-Franchising OK, so last time we were talking about the processes of starting up a business on your own. And how new business owners often encounter a lot of obstacles. But one way to get an easier start is through franchising.
That's when there's already a well-known, established company and you open up a new branch of that company in a new location. Your new business will be a part of the larger established company with the same name and it'll be run just like the other branches of that company. Let's discuss some advantages of franchising.
Now, one great advantage of franchising is that the company provides training to you and all of your employees. They teach you about all the aspects of the business and you're given a plan to follow for success. So, you don't have to do the training yourself or come up with your own business plan. For example, if you're opening up a new division of a restaurant that sells pizza, say. Somebody from the company will come to the restaurant that you're opening and they'll train you and your employees in how to prepare the pizzas, how to take food orders, plus everything about how to operate the restaurant so it'll be run exactly like all the other restaurants in the company.
Another advantage of franchising is the established customer base because your business will have the same name as the company that's already well-known. It'll already have loyal customers following. So when you open a new division people will want to come because they'll be confident of its quality. So, again, let's say you're opening a new restaurant, a pizza place. The restaurant is already well-known because it has such good pizza. So when you open your own restaurant with the same name in a new location, people know your pizza's going to be really good, too. They'll go to your restaurant because they already trust they'll have a good experience there.
TPO34
Task3:Program to Provide Free Tutoring Reading Part: Program to Provide Free Tutoring The university has announced that starting with the fall semester, free tutoring will be available to all new students for their entire first year. The academic dean, James Maxwell, commented, "The university is aware of the academic problems that many first-year students face when making the transition from high school to college." The new tutoring program, he said, is designed to assist first-year students who want or need additional support with their academic course work. The program will also be organized so that individual students can arrange to work with tutors majoring in their own chosen field of study.
听力原文： Now listen to two students discussing the article.
Man: Hey, did you read about this plan?
Woman: Yeah, and I think it's really a great idea.
Man: Why's that?
Woman: Well, a lot of new students really need his, I mean, it, s not just about getting extra help with the course material, the/ II probably also get information about things like taking notes or the best way to study for exams.
Man: Yeah, I barely even knew how to do those Things when I first came here.
Woman: Neither did I. So these are things most students wind up having to learn on their own at first.
That's why so many of them have a hard time.
Man: And if s probably good that they can work with somebody who has the same interests.
Woman: Right. That will be a real advantage: to get information about the classes you're gonna need to take from somebody who's already taken those classes. And they could recommend professors and tell you who the best advisers in the department are, things like that.
Man: I see what you mean, so new students could get access to information about the program from another student, s point of view.
Woman: Exactly! Question: The woman expresses her opinion about the university's plan. Briefly summarize the plan. Then state her opinion about the plan and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion.
Task4:The Familiarity Principle Reading Part: The Familiarity Principle People tend to develop a preference for this they have previously encountered, things they are familiar with.
Social psychologists refer to this tendency as the familiarity principle. Given a choice between two similar items, one they have experienced before and another that is new, most people will choose the familiar item.
This principle operates even when people are not conscious of their previous experience with an item. Once people have been exposed to an item - even if they do not recall having been exposed to it - they will tend to prefer that item over other items to which they have not been previously exposed.
听力原文： Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic in a Psychology class. Some researchers did an experiment related to this. What they did was they assembled a group of subjects, a group of students, and they showed these students a series of geometrical shapes. These were very distinctive shapes, a little unusual, not the kind of shapes students often see. But they only showed the students the shapes for a very short period of time, about a second. They also lowered the light in the room to make it even more difficult for the students to see the shapes. So the shapes were there for a split second in dim light and then they were gone.
In the next step of the experiment, the researchers again showed the students some shapes, but this time they gave the students a longer time to look at them. And this time they showed the images in pairs, two at a time. In each pair, one shape was a shape the students had already seen for just a split second in dim light.
And the other was some other shape that hadn't been shown to them before. After presenting each pair, the researchers asked the students to say which of the two shapes they liked better.
Most of the time, the students preferred the shape the'd already seen earlier in the experiment. Now, if you asked them if they'd already seen that shape, they probably wouldn't know for sure.
But that didn't matter. They still tended to prefer the shapes they'd already seen.
Question: Explain how the experiment described by the professor illustrates the familiarity principle.
Task5:A conversation between two students 听力原文： Listen to a conversation between two students.
Woman: Hey, Mike, how' s it going?
Man: OK Woman: Something's the matter?
Man:Well, sort of. I' m taking this French class(woman) OK?
Question: Briefly summarize the problem the speakers are discussing. Then state which of the two solutions from the conversation you would recommend. Explain the reasons for your recommendation.
Task6:A lecture in a Biology class 听力原文： Listen to part of a lecture in a Biology class.
So, OK, we' ve been talking about frogs, and like all amphibians, frog has thin skin, which means they lose moisture through their skin easily. Now, typically, we think of frogs as living in wet environments. But for frogs who live in dry places, with desert-like conditions, this can be a problem. Frogs have been able to survive in such areas by having different physical features, special dry-climate features that help them maintain an adequate level of moisture in their cells and avoid drying out.
Some frogs do this by preventing water loss through their skin. By creating a sort of covering over their skin, they greatly reduce their skirt s exposure to the dry air. The covering actslike a barrier that locks in moisture.
For example, some frogs secrete a substance throughtheir skin, a fatty substance that they rub off over their skin using their hands and feet, whichcreates a waxy layer all around their bodies that s almost completely water-tight.
Other frogs maintain an adequate level of moisture through a different physical feature, onethat allows them to store water inside their bodies for later use. A specially modified internal organ inside their bodies enables them to have a high water-storage capacity. So the frogs are able to absorb and store moisture during wet rainy times which they can rely on to get through dry periods. The aptly named water-holding frog, for example, has a bladder that is highly elastic and stretchable. When it does rain, the frog absorbs water through its skin and its bladder stretches to hold this extra water. The water is then slowly released from the special bladder into the frog' s internal tissues until the next rain which might not be for several months.
Question: Using points and examples from the lecture, explain two dry-climate features of frogs.
TPO35
Task 3 Reading University Should Allow Students to Audit Classes Many universities allow students to audit classes. That is, students may attend lectures and discussions for a particular class without completing the assignments, receiving a grade, or earning credit for the class. I think our university should allow this. Auditing classes would be good for interested students, since they would be able to learn more and experience a variety of different classes that they would not otherwise be able to take.
Furthermore, it shouldn't create any difficulties or additional obligations for professors, because these students wouldn't take tests or write papers that need to be graded.
Sincerely, Samuel Stuart listening Boy Did you see this letter, Molly?
Girl Yeah, but I don't agree with him.
Boy Why not?
Girl Well, it might have some educational benefit for the people doing it, but overall for the other students who are actually taking the classes, it wouldn't be good.
Boy How come?
Girl Because anyone who is taking the class for a grade, for credit, puts in a lot of time preparing for it, doing the reading and assignments, whereas people who aren't, they might not be as well prepared, and that would affect the quality of the class discussion.
Boy You mean the discussions wouldn't be at a very high level?
Girl Right. Because people who aren't taking the class for a grade would be asking really basic questions.
They'll be slowing down the class discussion by taking time to discuss basic stuff that was already covered in the reading assignments.
Boy That's good point. I can see how that might happen.
Girl Plus, he's wrong about the work it requires for the professor.
Boy But it's true the professor doesn't have to grade anything.
Girl Sure. But there are lots of other little things that can add up to more work. Like they'd have to prepare extra handouts for the class, 丨 earn extra names, and well, possibly stay after class to answer those students1 questions.
Boy Yeah I guess that's all extra work.
Girl Absolutely. All these little things add up and require the professors attention.
Task 4 Reading Integrated Farming Many farmers keep animals and raise crops at the same time. While some farmers treat the cultivation of their animals and plants as two separate activities, others integrate the two so that they work together. This is called integrated farming. Integrated fanning uses the natural behavior of animals in a way that helps to keep both animals and crops healthy and thriving. By integrating a particular animal with a specific crop, farmers create a system in which both animals and plants provide for each others1 needs.
Listening Professor Okay. So an example of this is when chickens are used to prepare a field for planting.
Farmers who do this have a special kind of little house that they keep their chickens in. This little house has four walls and a roof, but it doesn't have any floor. And it has wheels attached to it so it can easily be moved from one location to another. So farmers move this little house to a field where something is going to be planted, say, bean plants. And then the chickens are placed inside the house.
Now remember there's no floor in this house. And what the chickens do is, they walk around inside the house and peck at the soil and eat any weeds or wild plants that they find. And then when the chickens are done eating the weeds in that location, the farmers move that house to the next section of the field. And again, the chickens peck at the soil and eat the weeds. So the chickens get to eat lots of weeds, which are good for them.
Now this activity is also good for the bean plants that'll be growing in the field because when the chickens eat the weeds they are improving the quality of the soil. Thanks to the chickens, when the bean plants start to grow, there won't be any weeds there to compete with them for crucial resources like sunlight and water.
Task 5 Girl Hey，Jim. How's it going? Got plans for the summer yet?
Boy Yeah. Actually, I got a month-long internship in a town about three hours from here, working in a magazine, pretty excited.
Girl An internship with a magazine, very cool! Boy Yeah. I am excited to get to know a new area too.
Girl So have you found a place to stay for the month?
Boy Actually I have, but I'm gonna keep my apartment here on campus while I'm gone, keep paying rent on it.
And so Tm just going to be renting a room during the internship, you know, to save money.
Girl Makes sense.
Boy And the room I found is pretty cheap, and in a great location, very close to the magazine where I will be working. Only thing is, it doesnl come with any furniture.
Girl Nothing?
Boy No. Nothing. The room isn't furnished, not desk, no chairs, no bed, no sofa.
So I have to do something about that. I was going to try to see if I could buy some inexpensive used furniture once I get up there.
Girl Sounds good. Tm sure of there are plenty of places you can buy cheap stuff. Boy And maybe sell once the internship is over. Only thing is, it's not guaranteed I'll be able to find everything I need for cheap prices. And I don't want to spend a lot since it's just for the month.
Girl Well, what about the furniture you already have in your apartment here on campus?
Boy Yeah. I do have some nice pieces of furniture in my apartment that I could move to the room, but I donl have a way to get it there. I would have to rent a truck or something. It would be kind of a hassle loading it into truck, carrying it up and down all the stairs, driving the three hours.
Girl Yeah. And then you would have to move it all back after the month was over.
Task 6 Professor Okay. So as we know, archaeologists discover objects from past civilizations, stuff like old pottery, old tools, even sometimes, old bits of fabric, and they examine these artifacts to learn about past civilizations.
But why are some artifacts preserved well enough to last for thousands of years, while others just wear away and disappear? Well, a lot of it has to do with the environmental conditions in the area where the artifacts are found.
Artifacts are preserved better in environments where the bacteria that cause decay are less likely to grow. So lefs look at two environmental conditions that discourage bacterial growth and thus help preserve archaeological artifacts.
One environmental condition that inhibits bacterial growth and helps preserve artifacts is aridity, um, lack of moisture. Bacterial that cause decay can't survive well in dry environments. And artifacts donl decay as fast in arid climates without much moisture, so many of the best preserved archaeological artifacts have been found in such climates.
For example, in the deserts of Egypt, archaeologists have found tombs more than two thousand years old with brightly colored wall paintings in them. And those wall paintings, well, their colors were still as clear and bright as a painting made today.
Another environmental condition is lack of oxygen. Bacteria, like all living things, depend on oxygen to grow.
So when there's no oxygen present, they canl grow and cause decay. So artifacts are usually well preserved when they end up in environments that contain little or no oxygen, like, for example, the bottom of the ocean, which is where archaeologists found an ancient ship that had sunk and settled into the mud at the bottom of the Mediterranean Sea. The ship was carrying vases and the vases were still intact and remarkably well preserved.
TPO36
task1 Question: What advice would you give to a child just starting school? Why do you think this advice will be helpful to the child? Use details and examples to explain your answer.
task2 Question: Some people prefer to buy the food that is already prepared. Other people prefer to buy fresh food and prepare meals by themselves. Which do you prefer? Explain why, using details and examples in your answer.
Task3:Allow Laptops in Class Task3 :Allow Laptops in Class Though most of us own laptop computer, we are currently not allowed to use them during class. I think this policy should be changed. Since most of us type faster than we write by hand, taking notes on a computer would be quicker and easier, so we could pay more attention to professor's lectures. Also, since laptop computers have internet access, professors could direct students to view Web sites with useful information while lectures are going on. They could look up useful facts and background information on a topic or view different photographs or illustrations of something the professor is describing. This would help students gain a more complete understanding of lecture topics.
Task3 听力： Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
W : Did you see this letter in the paper?
M : Yeah, but I don't think it's a good idea.
W : Why not?
M : Well, cause I think students would pay even less attention to the professor; not more . I think they'd be too much of distraction.
W : How so?
M : Well, maybe some students would actually use laptops to take notes...
W : I would.
M : Ok, you would, but a lot of people, most people, would be too busy playing around with them instead. You know, surfing the Internet, emailing friends, playing computer games, that kind of stuff.
W : Huh ... so you really think they'd pay less attention ?
M : Yea, really I think that's what would happen.
W : Alright, but what about her second point? Don't you think if students had them in class professors would be able to use the Internet as a teaching tool?
M : Well, the problem with that is that not everyone has a laptop computer. Only some people have one.
W: True...
M : So, you see, not everyone would be able to follow along. It wouldn't be useful as a teaching tool if only some students could follow along ,but not others.
W : I see what you mean.
Task3 题目 Question: The man expresses his opinion of the proposal the student makes in the letter. State his opinion and explain the reasons he gives for holding that opinion Task4(听力+阅读+题目):The Suspension of Disbelief Task4 阅读：The Suspension of Disbelief As members of an audience, we can best enjoy the performance of a play if we become emotionally involved with the events and characters on stage. But to do this, we need to forget that what we see on stage is only imaginary, and pretend instead-temporarily--that it is real. This ability to temporarily put aside, or suspend, our doubt and believe that the action of a play is real is called the suspension of disbelief.
Suspending disbelief enables viewers to become more and more absorbed in the play as they watch the story develop, and to respond emotionally to the events and characters as if they were real.
Task4 听力： So for example, back when I was in college one of my roommates, Richard, was in a play I went to see and when he first walked out on stage, I have to admit I was a little distracted. Richard was dressed up like an old man. I could tell that his hair was colored gray and he was pretending, you know, to be older, so he walked more slowly; the way an older person would, but at first I only saw him as my roommate dressed up to look like an older man, but then as the play went on I began to think of him less as the guy I lived with and more as this older man who was a father; one who had worked very hard for his family, the family in the play and in the play the father gets sick and so, is out of work, which you know, caused me to become a little sad and because of the father's long illness, the family was worried that they wouldn't have enough money to pay the bills and this made me feel worried too. Well, in the end, what happened was the family all came together and everyone found jobs and started working. They all pitched in to help in the time of crisis, so the family gets by and pays their bills and soon after, the father recovers from his illness and this made me feel relieved and even rather happy.
Task4 题目 Question: Explain how the example from the lecture illustrates the suspension of disbelief.
Task5(听力+题目):Time Conflict Task5 听力： Listen to a conversation between two students discussing plans for the weekend.
M : Hey Samantha ! I heard there's a big ski trip planned for this weekend.
W : Right! The ski club's going up to Mount Henderson this weekend.
M . That'II be fun.
W : I know, but I kind of have a problem. My cousin called and she's coming here this weekend. She has some kind of conference in town on Saturday and anyway, she wants to get together for dinner Saturday night.
M : So what'd you tell her?
W : Oh course I couldn't really say no and anyway, I' m looking forward to seeing her. She's a lot of fun .
It' s just that.
M : Now you have to figure out how to see her and go on the ski trip.
W : Exactly,How can I do both ? Got any ideas ?
M : Well, you could explain to her that you already made plans to go on the ski trip. Ask her if she'd be willing to come to town on Friday instead of Saturday. That way you two could get together before her conference starts.
W : Hmm ... I' m sure she'd be willing to come on Friday if I asked her to. Then we could go out to dinner Friday night instead of Saturday night.
M : And you could go skiing on Saturday like you planned.
W: Yea , the only problem is that I'm a little worried about offending her. You know, asking her to come early so I don't have to change my plans.
M : Well, you did make plans to go skiing first.
W: True.
M : But, I do have another idea: you could just go for part of the ski trip.
W : What do you mean?
M : Well, instead of going on Saturday with the rest of the group, why don't you just drive up to Mount Henderson on Sunday? That way you get to spend Saturday night with your cousin and you could meet the group and go skiing on Sunday.
W : Wow ! That's another good idea. It's just that I'm not sure it's worth it to go up on Sunday. I'd only get a couple hours of skiing in and then it'd be time to come back.
Task5 题目 Question: Boy Hey, Samantha. I heard there's a big ski trip planned for this weekend.
Girl Right. The Ski Club is going up to Mount Henderson this weekend.
Boy That'd be fun.
Girl I know. But I kind of have a problem. My cousin called and she's coming here this weekend. She has some kind of conference in town on Saturday. And, anyway, she wants to get together for dinner Saturday night.
Boy So what did you tell her?
Girl Of course, I couldn't really say no. And anyway, I am looking forward to seeing her. She's a lot of fun. It's just that...
Boy Now you have to figure out how to see her and go on the ski trip.
Girl Exactly. How can I do both? Got any ideas?
Boy Well, you could explain to her that you already made plans to go on the ski trip. Ask her if she would be willing to come to town on Friday instead of Saturday. That way you two could get together before her conference starts.
Girl Hmm...I'm sure she'd be willing to come on Friday if I asked her too. Then we could go out for dinner Friday night instead of Saturday night.
Boy And you could go skiing on Saturday like you planned.
Girl Yeah. The only problem is that Tm a little worried about offending her, you know, asking her to come early so 丨 don't have to change my plans.
Boy Well, you did make plans to go skiing first.
Girl True. But I do have another idea. You could just go for part of the ski trip.
Boy What do you mean?
Girl Well, instead of going on Saturday with the rest of the group, why don't you just drive up on Mount Henderson on Sunday? That way you get to spend Saturday night with your cousin and you could meet the group and go skiing on Sunday.
Boy Wow! That's another good idea. It's just that I'm not sure it's worth it to go up on Sunday. I would only get a couple of hours of skiing and, and then it would be time to come back.
Using the examples from the professor's lecture, explain how snails survive in hot and dry climate.
Task6(听力+题目):A Lecture in a Biology Class Task6 听力 Listen to part of a lecture in a Biology class So, we know animals in many climates have to develop strategies; ways to protect themselves when the weather becomes especially hot and dry in the summers. Lets start talking about how one small creature, a snail, can do this. Now, as you know, a snail is a very small creature with a soft, moist body, most of which is protected by a hard shell. A snail is a good example of an animal that has developed certain strategies for coping with high temperatures and draught, or lack of water. First, to avoid the heat when the sun comes out, snails move into the shelter of vegetation ... you know, plants or leaves, to get out of the sun and into the shade.Now, of course the ground can become very hot in the sun. It absorbs and radiates heat, so snails will move up off of the ground to places where it is cooler. They may attach themselves to a wall or a tree where it is cooler than on the ground. Now, it's not just heat that snails need to worry about . They also need to avoid drying out due to lack of water, so during a really warm, dry day or during the summer months , snails secrete a sticky, slimy substance made up of calcium and it covers the opening of their shell; covers and closes it up . This keeps the moisture inside the shell and prevents the snail from drying out. Snails can stay inside their shells closed up like this for a long time, even several months if it# s a really dry summer. Their bodies, well everything slows down and so they don't need food. They can survive on what food they've stored up, but when it rains and water is available again, the snail opens up its shell to get some.
Task6 题目 Question: Using the examples from the professor's lecture, explain how snails survive in hot and dry climate.
TPO37
Task3(听力+阅读+题目):Room Phones Are Unnecessary Reading Part: Room Phones Are Unnecessary As part of the cost of student housing，students play to have phones in their dormitory rooms. I think this is unnecessary, and the university should remove the phones from student's rooms. Room phones are not needed since students all have phones we can use to make calls instead. Removing the room phones would also have a cost benefit for students，since we would save money if we didn't have to pay the cost of phone service for the rooms.
Sincerely Brad Smith Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
Listening Part： W: Hey Jimmy! Did you read this ?
M: I did, yeah. What do you think about it ?
W: I don't know. I don't think it'd be a very good idea.
M: Oh yeah? But it's true that a lot of us have our own phones.
W: Yeah , but it's good to have both. The service we get with our own phones isn't always reliable. Maybe it' s because there're a lot of hills around here, but my service doesn't work that well in this area. A lot of times calls get cut off where the reception isn't good. I can't hear the person on the other line.
M: Yeah, I've had some friends say that too actually.
W: So it's good to have a backup option; something we can use if our own phones aren't working.
M: I see what you mean, but when you think of the money...
W: Well f I don't buy his argument there either because I don't know if you've noticed this on the housing bill we get from the university, but right now we only pay per call.
M: Oh really?
W: Yeah, so if you don't make many calls, you don't pay much. I mean, if you use it a lot of course you'll pay more, but students can avoid that if they just avoid using it as much as possible.
M: Oh , I see. Ok...
W: So, I think they should just keep it the way it is now.
Question: The woman expresses her opinion about the proposal described in the letter. Briefly summarize the proposal. Then state her opinion about the proposal and explain the reasons she gives forholding that opinion.
Task4(听力+阅读+题目):Communal Nutrition Reading Part: Communal Nutrition Some kinds of social insects live in large groups or colonies in which different members of the colony have different tasks to keep the colony running smoothly. Some members of the colony are responsible for providing appropriate food for the entire colony. These insects typically practice communal nutrition. They gather different kinds of food and bring it to the nest to be shared by all members of the colony. They instinctively adjust and regulate the food they provide to meet the particular nutritional needs of the different members of the colony at any given time.
Listening Part： Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic in a biology class.
Ok, so here's a good example of this among ants. Ants live together in these large nests and certain ants, the forager ants, have a particular job to do. They go out each day to look for food items; leaves, seeds, fruit, things like that and then these ants bring them back to the nest, so all the other ants can eat them. Now, the forager ants don't just bring back whatever they may happen to find. They bring back different kinds of food . For example, adult ants normally like to eat things that are rich in sugar because they need energy to carry on other activities in the nest, so at a time when the colony is composed mostly of adult ants, the forager ants look for pieces of fruit and other sugar - rich items. They bring these back to the nest for the adult ants to eat to get the energy they need, but there is a time of the year when baby ants are born. Now, the baby ants need a different kind of food. They need food that will help them grow into adults, so their food needs to be rich in protein. So now the forager ants do something different. They start to gather more food items that are rich in protein, like certain types of leaves or mushrooms. This way the young ants get the protein they need to help them grow.
Question: Using the example of ants, explain the concept of communal nutrition.
TASK 5 Girl So, Mike. You said you wanted to move off campus. Did you ever find an apartment?
Boy Yeah. I did.
Girl So how is it?
Boy Oh, ifs great, except that ifs pretty far from campus. Ifs on the other side of town.
Girl Oh, so you have a pretty long commute to campus then?
Boy Yeah. And now can you believe it? My car broke down.
Girl Oh, wow! That's too bad.
Boy Well, the car is pretty old, so Tm not surprised it broke down. But ifs gonna cost a lot of money to get it fixed, a lot more than I can afford right now.
Girl So what are you gonna do? You need a car to get to campus, right?
Boy Yeah. And now can you believe it? My car broke down.
Girl Oh，wow! That's too bad.
Boy Well, the car is pretty old, so Tm not surprised it broke down. But ifs gonna cost a lot of money to get it fixed, a lot more than I can afford right now.
Girl So what are you gonna do? You need a car to get to campus, right?
Boy Yeah. One option would be to borrow the money to fix the car. I talked to my brother. He^ out of school and working now and he said he would loan me money to get it fixed.
Girl That's very nice of him.
Boy Definitely. But if I borrowed the money from him, I would still have to pay it back pretty soon. That would be tough since I only have a part-time job.
Girl Yeah. That could take a while. Do you have any other options?
Boy Well, Tm also thinking about not fixing the car right now. Maybe try to save the money and just take the bus or something.
Girl So you can get the bus near your house?
Boy Yeah, there's a bus stop a couple of blocks from my apartment. Trouble is, I have to change buses a couple of times so it takes a really long time to get to campus and a long time to get back home.
Girl Td really have to adjust my schedule.
Boy I see. That doesn't sound very convenient.
Task6(听力+题目):Art History Class Listening Listen to part of a lecture from an art history class.
So last class we were talking a bit about the history of photography and as I was saying, with the invention of the camera in the mid to late 1800s, for the first time people were able to record realistic images.
Up until then, painting, portraits, landscapes, were the way that realistic images were recorded; the image of a person's face, the painting of a mountain range, but with the invention of the camera, now there was this new piece of technology; this machine that took realistic images and this had an enormous effect on painting. One effect was that painters began using photographs as a tool; a tool to help them paint more realistically. Before the camera, it was extremely difficult to realistically depict a moving object in a painting, but now photography was able to capture fleeting moments; freeze them in time and painters were able to use these photographs as a basis for their paintings. For example, the legs of a horse as its running.
Photography could now capture the exact position of a horse's legs in midair, which a painter could use to more realistically create a painting of horses galloping . Photography also affected painting in a more conceptual way. The fact that cameras could now perfectly record realistic images led some painters to change their style; to stop painting realistically and adopt a more abstract way of painting. An abstract style enabled painters to contrast their art with photography, to set their art apart from the art of photography.
They didn't want their paintings to look anything like photographs. They wanted their art to be more imaginative, more abstract. For example, if a painter were painting people f he or she might not use natural skin tones for the skin and instead paint the people's skin unnatural colors, like green, purple, or blue, which of course is not realistic.
Question: Using points and examples from the lecture, explain two ways that photography affected painting.
TPO38
Task3(听力+阅读+题目):Student Play Should Be Free for Everyone Reading Part: Student Play Should Be Free for Everyone Thanks to our superb theater program here at the university, we are fortunate to be able to see many plays that are put on by student actors. HoWe'ver, while all employees and students at the university may attend these plays for free, anyone who is not directly associated with the university must play a fee to attend. I think student plays should be open to everyone free of charge. That way, people in the local community could benefit from having a free entertainment opinion intown. It would also be good for the student actors, since it would help to ensure larger audiences at the plays.
Listening Part: Now listen to two students discussing about the letter.
W: Hey Paul! You're an actor, right ? What do you think about this idea ?
M: I think it's great! W: Oh yeah ?
M: Absolutely! I mean, for the people in town there's sometimes not a lot going on, not a lot to do .
There's not even a movie theater nearby and if you want to see a professional show you have to travel. I think the nearest professional theater's like an hour away.
W: Yeah , plus those professional plays can be really expensive. I saw one last semester and the ticket cost me like $40.
M: Right, so it'II be good for people to have another entertainment option; an opportunity to see live shows that won't be so expensive.
W: Sure! M: Plus it would definitely be helpful for us actors.
W: Yeah?
M: Yeah, because on some nights there's not a lot of people that go; not a lot of people there to watch us and that can have a bad effect on the show. It might not be as good.
W: Yeah. I can imagine it must be a completely different energy for you and the other actors if the seats are half empty.
M: Exactly . Like if the show was a comedy and it's supposed to be funny, in order for it to really seem funny, there needs to be a lot of people there to laugh at the jokes. Otherwise it just doesn't seem as humorous. Having a crowd there laughing at the jokes really helps the show along; helps it to be good.
W: That makes sense. So this proposal would help that.
M: Yeah, help make it more likely that there'd be a full house; a lot of people watching.
Question: The man expresses his opinion about the proposal described in the letter. Briefly summarize the proposal. Then state his opinion about the proposal and explain the reasons he gives for holding the opinion.
Task4(听力+阅读+题目):Phoresy Reading Part: Phoresy Animals often have to move from place to place to obtain resources. Most animals do so using their own physical effort, but animals of certain species may not be able to transport themselves efficiently in order to access the resources they need. These animals may make use of another animal species to transport them, without causing any injury to the other species. This relationship is known as phoresy. Phoresy, which is a temporary relationship, benefits the passenger species and causes little or no harm to the species doing the transporting.
Listening Part： Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic in a biology class So, here's a good example of this. Mites are very small, insect-like creatures. Mites live in tropical climates and feed on nectar and pollen and flowers, but these tropical flowers don't last long. They wilt and fall off quickly and so the mites need to find new flowers in order to get more nectar and pollen to eat, but the mites can't fly and they are so small that it would take them awhile and a lot of effort to climb down one flower, crawl to another one, and climb all the way up again. So, how do they get to the next flower? Well, there's a bird: the hummingbird. Hummingbirds eat the nectar from the same flowers as the mites, so when a hummingbird comes around and sticks its beak into the flowers to get the nectar out, the mites quickly climb onto the hummingbird. Well, as I mentioned, mites are pretty tiny, so the hummingbird isn't harmed in any way and all they do is stick to the hummingbird. Since the hummingbird also goes from flower to flower for nectar, it takes the mites along. Once the hummingbird gets to the next flower, the mites climb off and eat some pollen and nectar there on the new flower. Without the hummingbird carrying them from one flower to another, the mites would find it much more difficult getting food.
Question: Explain how the example of the mite and hummingbird in the lecture, illustrates the concept of phoresy.
Task5(听力+题目):Lab Assistant Listen to a conversation between two students.
M : Hey Jeff! How's it going ?
M : Not too good. You know how I work as a lab assistant in one of the science labs ?
W: Yeah ...
M : Well, I was in there this afternoon and I had some textbooks with me and I accidentally left one of my psychology books in there. It' s a special book our teacher loaned each student in the class, so I can't get it anywhere else and now the lab's locked up for the night.
W : There's no way you can get back into the lab to get it ?
M : No and I have a psychology test tomorrow morning and I really need the book to study.
W : So, what are you going to do?
M : Well, I could just study from my notes tonight then go to the Science Building and get my book early tomorrow morning. The lab opens at 6:00 AM and my test's at 8:00 .
W : 6:00 AM is pretty early.
M : Yeah. I mean, I could do it, but I'd have to get up at like 5:00 and I wouldn't have much time to study the stuff in the book before the test.
W: Hmm...
M : My other option would be to study with another student from that class.
W : Do you know someone you could study with ?
M : Yeah ! There's a guy who sits next to me in class and he actually asked me if r d be interested in studying for the exam with him tonight.
W : And he has the book?
M : Yeah.
W : Well, why not do that ? Then you'd have more time to study the stuff in the book.
M : Well, he's not a very good student. He has missed a lot of classes and he doesn't take good notes during the lectures.
W : So you might spend a lot of time tutoring him instead of studying the stuff you need to study.
M : Exactly, but he does have the book.
Question: Briefly summarize the problem the speakers are discussing. Then state which of the two solutions from the conversation you would recommend. Explain the reasons for your recommendation.
Task6(听力+题目):A lecture From a History Class Listen to part of a lecture from a history class.
So, we've been talking about life in ancient times and today I want to discuss an important aspect of ancient civilizations: the economy. As the economies of ancient civilizations developed over time and became more complex, certain changes tended to occur. Lets talk about a couple of the changes that happened as the economies of ancient civilizations developed. One of the key economic changes was in the way that people paid for goods and services. As their civilizations developed, many began to use currency, money, to pay for goods and services rather than trading with each other. A monetary system made it easier to make purchases because people could buy from anyone, not just those that wanted to trade. So, for example, say a man who baked bread wanted a new coat .Well, with a monetary system, the man could buy a new coat from the coat maker with money. This was better than trading because the coat maker might not want to trade a coat for the bread maker's bread. Now, another economic change was that ancient civilizations began to acquire items from far away. In the past, people would only trade locally, but as their civilizations developed, they began trading with other people in distant places, so they were able to acquire goods they wouldn't have otherwise. For example, the ancient Romans never had silk fabric until they started trading with the Chinese who lived a great distance from them. Once the Romans started traveling far away to China, they could acquire silk, which was highly prized by the Romans because you just couldn't get it anywhere nearby.
Question: Using points and examples from the lecture, explain two economic changes that occurred in ancient civilizations.
TPO39
Task3 Start a Ride-sharing Program Students who live off-campus often get to campus by car. I propose that the university create a student ride-sharing program, where students who live in the same area would form groups of four with each group driving to campus together in one car. The ride-sharing program would benefit students as well as the environment. For the students, they would save money by driving to campus in groups instead of separately.
And since there would be fewer cars going and coming from campus, there would be a positive impact on the environment.
Sincerely Jim Sears Boy Ellen, you drive to campus, right? Did you see this letter in the paper today?
Girl Yeah, I did. I think it makes a lot of sense. So it would be great if the university starts something like that.
Boy Okay.
Girl Well, now 丨 drive to campus all by myself and by gas now and then」t isn't much each time I fill the tank, but it adds up.
Boy I'm sure.
Girl So a program like that would really help students. They would spend less on gas. And ifs not just gas either.
Ifs also the wear and tear on the car. I mean, the more you use a car going back and forth all the time, the more you have to do maintenance and repairs.
Boy Right. But do you think the program would help that other benefit?
Girl I do because there have been a lot of people coming into the city, so there's much more traffic now than before. And all the carbon dioxide that comes from all those cars on the road is polluting the environment more and more.
Boy So with this program...
Girl Right. There would be less carbon dioxide pouring out into the air. And this would reduce environmental pollution and the air quality would certainly improve.
托福综合口语 TPO39 Task4(阅读+题目):Signaling Reading Part: Signaling Customers are often willing to pay higher prices for high-quality products, hoWe'ver, without specialized knowledge, it can be difficult to evaluate whether certain items are highly quality. When customers are unsure whether an item is high quality, ad worth the prize, they are less likely to purchase it.
This problem can be solved through signaling . The seller of a product finds a way to signal, or demonstrate, to the buyer that the product is high quality. One common signaling strategy is to have a person or company that is not involved in the sale provides an objective, unbiased judgment about the quality of a product.
So, okay, here's a good example. A friend of mine owns a small jewelry store where she sells jewelry. And the jewelry she sells, watches, rings, necklaces, is very expensive, thousands of dollars because it's all real gold, real diamonds and other precious gem stones. So of course when customers come into her store, well, if they are considering spending that much money on a piece of jewelry, they want to make sure ifs authentic, that the gold is real, that the gem stones are real and not just pieces of glass. But most customers don't actually know how to tell the difference on their own.
So in order to reassure her customers what my friend did is she had a jewelry expert come in and look at all the jewelry in her store. This expert had like twenty years of experience examining jewelry so he knew a lot about it. And the expert examined all the precious gem stones and certified that they were authentic, real.
And then my friend put up a sign in the store saying that all the jewelry in the store had been certified as authentic by a leading expert. So her customers would see the sign and know that all the jewelry in the store was real. And since the expert didn't work for my friend's store, it didn't matter to him if the jewelry got sold or not, so customers were likely to trust his opinion. The expert was therefore able to provide evidence that the jewelry was worth the high prices.
Question: Explain how the example used in the lecture illustrates the concept of signaling.
Task 5 Girl How's it going, Tom?
Boy So so. IVe got a problem.
Girl What's up?
Boy Well, the theater club's going to be doing this play 丨 really want to try out for. A production of Hamlet. Ifs my favorite Shakespeare play.
Girl Okay.
Boy And I thought the auditions were next week, but it turns out they are tomorrow morning. So I haven't prepared at all.
Girl Prepare what?
Boy Well, to audition, you have to perform a monologue. You choose a small part of the play, like, two or three minutes, and you perform it for the director. And base on that, the director chooses which actors will get parts in the play.
Girl Oh, okay. But you still have tonight to prepare.
Boy Well, the trouble is, I promised a friend I would help him study for a big physics test tonight. He's not doing well in the class and 丨 got an A in that class last semester.
Girl Okay.
Boy I mean, I could just cancel, you know, just tell him “sorry, I can't help you tonight.” Girl Could he find someone else to study with?
Boy Yeah. He probably could, but I did promise him.
Girl Hmm...
Boy Another option would be I could help my friend study for his exam, and then after we finish, I could just stay up late, all night if necessary and prepare for the audition.
Girl That would still leave you enough time to prepare?
Boy Yes. I think so. I mean, it would definitely better to have more time, but...
Girl And you might not perform very well if you are tired. Boy Yeah. Hmm...
Task 6 Professor There are certain animals that live high in the mountains, at altitudes of above the tree line where trees don't grow. And moving around in this mountainous environment can be challenging, because the mountain slopes can be very steep and rocky. Besides that, there's often ice or snow making these rocky slopes slippery and dangerous. So animals that live at high altitudes have special features that help them move around in this difficult mountainous environment.
So for one thing, many mountain animals have strong muscles that help them climb up and down the steep slopes. As they are moving around looking for food, they have to climb up these really steep mountain sides at a dramatic incline and get down again too. For many animals, this would be a real problem, requiring great strength and balance. Um, mountain goats, which live high up in the mountains in parts of North America. Mountain goats have a large, well-muscled chest and front leg area, and these big developed muscles in this area help them pull themselves up these near vertical slopes and balance in tight positions when climbing down.
Also, mountain animals often have specially adapted feet that help them keep from slipping when theyYe walking over ice or rocks. High altitude mountain slopes can be very slippery, especially when there are snow or ice on them. And it's a long way down if they fall. So mountain animals need to have a safe, sure footing.
Take the bighorn sheep for instance. These sheep have special toes that move independently so they can dig into the rock and ice and the back parts of their feet have special round rubbery pads that help them grip the surface of the rock or ice to prevent sliding as they move around.
TPO40
Task3 Reading University to Create a Lounge for Commuter Students Many students at our university do not live in dormitories These students live in town or in the suburbs and travel to campus every day The university has decided to provide these commuter students with a special lounge in the student center' with couches, chairs, and a television. University officials hope that this lounge'a place to socialize and relax' will give commuter students some of the same advantages that dormitory residents now have. An important additional feature of the lounge will be a bulletin board on the wall for posting and sharing information that may be especially useful to commuter students and their particular needs.
listening Now listen to two students discussing the article.
Hey, it's nice that they' re gonna do this.
It's not a bad idea, but do you think it'll accomplish what they're hoping?
Sure. I mean, the dormitories all have their own lounges, and think about how much time students spend there, and how many people they meet.
Yeah. I got to know a lot of people in my dorm during my first semester just watching TV and taking study breaks in the lounge.
Right. Those dorm lounges are really central to student life. And I met people there that really helped me with my schoolwork too. Students who live off campus don't have anything like that.
That's true.
Plus, I like the idea of posting stuff. You know, things like notices from students who want to get together with other students to share car rides to campus.
Task 4 Agonistic Behavior Within certain animal species, conflicts sometimes arise over resources such as territory or food. To resolve these conflicts, two animals of the same species may engage in agonistic behavior. With this type of aggressive behavior, the animals participate in a physical competition that demonstrates which animal is more powerful. While each animal attempts to prove its strength in the competition, it typically does so without harming the other animal. Once the winner is established, that animal gains access to the desired resources, while the weaker animal surrenders and leaves the area.
Now listen to part of a lecture in a biology class.
I know some scientists who were observing snakes in the wild. And they witnessed an encounter of this sort between two rattlesnakes.
Uh...as you may know, rattlesnakes eat various kinds of small animals. Small animals that live underground, in burrows, in little holes in the ground. And what these scientists saw was these two rattlesnakes had found the same hole and both wanted to eat whatever food was in that hole.
So what happened was: The two rattlesnakes faced each other and then they lifted their bodies into an upright position and made themselves as tall as possible. And then they started pushing each other, kind of wrestling with one another, each snake trying to gain control of the other snake.
And what's interesting is that during all these pushing and shoving and maneuvering, neither snake ever tried to bite the other snake. Neither snake ever tried to injure the other snake. So…after this went on for a while, one of the snakes finally gained control of the other snake, pushed it to the ground and held it there.
At this point, the snake that was on top could have easily bitten the other snake. But it didn't. Instead, it just released the other snake, just let it go. The snake that had lost just slithered away, and the snake that had won went down into the hole to look for food.
Task5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
Hey. Sally. How are you doing?
Well, okay. But l've got a bit of a problem.
Oh, yeah? What's up?
Well, I forgot that tonight is the night my theater class is taking a trip to see a play. We're taking a bus into the city.
Oh, sounds like fun.
Yeah. Well, we have to write a paper about the play for class. Cool thing is my professor got free tickets for us.
He and the director of the play are friends. So the whole class is going for free.
Free theater tickets. Excellent! Theater tickets can be expensive.
Yeah. Problem is, though, I have a big history test tomorrow morning and I really need to study.
l've been putting it off and I kind of forgot that tonight was when the theater class would be going to the play.
So you were planning to use tonight to study.
Yeah.
Well, could you do your studying, you know, study for the history test when you get back from the play tonight?
Yeah. It would be late though. I could study some on the bus and stay up late when we get back from the play.
Hmm...not exactly ideal study conditions though.
Exactly. So I was thinking i could go by myself into the city another night to see the play. The paper we have to write on the play isn't due for a couple of days. So they'd still be time.
Then you can get a good night's sleep before the history test.
Yup. But l'd have to buy the theater ticket myself. lt's only free if I go with the class tonight.
Task6 Listen to part of a lecture from a business class.
All right. So…um...a good salesperson needs to know how to talk to customers effectively.
Sometimes customers looking to buy products will raise concerns, things that may be keeping them from buying the product. And salespeople stand a much better chance of selling their products if they can effectively address these concerns. Let's look at a couple of strategies they use to address customers' concerns.
Okay. Now one strategy is to point out something special about the product. Something that outweighs the customer's concern, like a special feature. Like, say a customer is in an electronic store, and a salesperson is showing her a portable laptop computer. The customer expresses a concern saying the computer is expensive. Well, that's true. But the salesperson can provide information to outweigh the concern about the price by pointing out how fast the computer is, how much work it can get done in a short time. This special feature may outweigh the customer's concern, convince her that it's worth the price. So she's more likely to buy it.
Now another strategy is to demonstrate something about the product, actually use the product in front of the customer in response to a concern. Going back to the electronic store example, say the customer raises concerns about whether the laptop is portable enough, that it looks like it would be difficult to pack up and carry. Well, the salesperson could address this concern by unplugging the computer, putting it into its carrying case and slinging it over his shoulder, right in front of the customer. That is, he can demonstrate how easy it is to transport. This demonstration may help eliminate the customer's concerns about buying the computer.
TPO41
Task 3 Reading Final Project The final project for this course will be an oral presentation. Students must work with an assigned partner to select a topic and complete all related research for the project The partners will orally present their research to the class during the last two weeks of classes. This project will provide students with the opportunity to discover the rewards and challenges of working with another individual, an experience that will help them in future endeavors. Furthermore, these presentations will benefit the entire class: when students share their discoveries with the class, they enable other students to learn from their work.
Listening Task3 Now listen to two students discussing the assignment.
I don't know about this.
Why not? Sounds okay to me.
Thing is: depending on someone else makes me nervous. My roommate had to do a project like this and the other girl didn't show up to meetings, didn't do any research. My roommate had to do everything herself.
That's a drag. I guess if your partner is irresponsible, you are out of luck.
Exactly. It hurt her grade. I don't want the same thing to happen to me. Right now l'm more concerned with getting a good grade even though I know that 's not the lesson the professor has in mind.
Still, it'll be good to listen to everyone's stuff.
Well, I don't know. I mean, at the end of the semester, people are focused on studying for exams. Yeah.
Who has time to put something like this together when they're busy studying?
True.
I can't imagine anyone will be able to really do a good job with it. And everyone will be so preoccupied by then that they probably won't listen anyway. I think the professor's gonna be disappointed. And students…well...we'll all just be frustrated by the whole thing.
Task 4 Primacy Effect When people form opinions about a person or a situation, those opinions are likely to be based on first impressions, on an initial assessment of the person or situation. In other words, the opinions we have of people or situations tend to be based much more on the first information we learn about them than on information we learn later. This tendency is called the primacy effect. Researchers believe that the primacy effect occurs because after people have made an initial judgment, they tend to notice evidence that supports that judgment, and disregard or fail to notice evidence that contradicts it.
Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic in a psychology class.
Here's an example from my own life. Before I started teaching, I worked as a research assistant in a laboratory for a year.
Well, during my very first week on the job, I made a suggestion to my boss on how we could improve the way we were running an experiment. My suggestion was a good one. The experiment was successful and we got great results.
Anyway, that first week, because of that one experiment, my boss decided, perhaps without even realizing it, he decided I was a great research assistant and he never changed his mind. After that first week, I was...l was okay, you know, average. I was a good worker, but I also made mistakes.
Everyone does. But whenever my boss introduced me to someone, he'd say, this is John, our star research assistant.
But a co-worker of mine, she wasn't as fortunate, her first week at the lab, she made a big mistake and the lab lost some important data. We recovered the data, but it cost of the lab time and money. Well, our boss concluded that week that my co-worker was unreliable, incompetent.
And he continued to think that. But, actually, after that week, she turned out to be a good research assistant, probably better than me. She made some other small mistakes, like I said, everyone does. But our boss thought of her as unreliable cuz he only noticed her mistakes.
Task5 Now listen to a conversation between two students about campus housing.
Hi. Kate. How is it going?
Pretty good. I just found out l'm going to be staying on campus during the semester break.
Professor Clark asked me to help him with some research.
That's a pretty big deal.
Yeah. I guess it is, but the problem is: the dorm is always closed. So I need to find housing for about two weeks.
Oh, that's rough. But didn't you mention that you had a couple of friends that live in an apartment not too far from campus? Are they gonna be around?
Yeah. Mary and Alan. They say they are gonna stick around here during the break.
Well, so why don't you just stay with them?
I've been thinking about asking them.
And they probably wouldn't charge you anything, right? Just for a couple of weeks.
Yeah. Probably not. i'm sure they'd be fine with it. But since it's between classes and they won't have classes and stuff, l'm worried that… You're afraid that they might want to party too much?
Right. They'll be on vacation, but l'll have to get up early in the morning to work all day, so we'll be on completely different schedules.
Hmm...well, another possibility is that sometimes you can get special permission to stay at the dorm.
Really? You mean they'd let me stay in my own dorm room? I wouldn't have to move?
Well, you would, actually, because they usually only keep one of the dorms open and it's not the one you're in.
Hmm...l wonder how much they charge.
Well, it's not as cheap as staying with friends, but… But it would be quieter… True.
Task6 Listen to part of a lecture in a psychology class.
Children like to play. Everybody knows that. When kids play, they have fun. But there's more to play than just having fun. Play is also important if kids are to develop in an emotionally healthy way. From a psychological perspective…well, let's talk about two reasons psychologists believe play benefits kids.
First, play helps children feel more in control. Why? Well, some psychologists have suggested that small children often feel helpless. They have to depend on other people, adults, for everything. They've got very little control over their own lives. Parents decide when they eat, what they eat, what they wear. This constant state of dependency can make kids feel uneasy and anxious. But when kids play, they're able to control their world of play. They decide…oh...which toy they're gonna play with and how they're gonna play with it. Maybe they take some building blocks and make a building out of them. They are constructing something with no help at all. So according to this theory, playing gives children a sense of being in control and they don't feel so helpless.
And here's another way play contributes to healthy psychological development. It gives children a safe way to explore certain urges, desires they have, but ones that don't represent…well...typically acceptable behavior. For example, uh, take the urge to be destructive.
All kids have this urge, but if they try to act on it and start actually breaking things or messing things up around the house, their parents will get upset. But kids are naturally curious. They want to explore what it's like to be destructive, but they don't want their parents to be upset with them. So by acting out destructive behaviors during play, the problem is solved cuz in play, they're allowed to be destructive. Think about it.
Think of the example before where a kid builds something out of blocks. Isn't it really common to see a kid build a tower or something and then just smash it all down? Destructive in a way, but no harm done, right?
TPO42
Task 3 Reading No More Evening Classes?
The administration has announced that starting next fall, the university will stop offering evening classes in many departments. According to a university administrator, the decision was prompted by a steady decline in enrollments in evening classes. "Evening classes are just too small," the administrator said. When asked to explain the decline in enrollments, the administrator pointed to the fact that most evening classes are taught by teaching assistants, who are usually graduate students. 'Surveys show that students prefer to take classes taught by experienced faculty members/ the spokesperson said, "probably because they simply know more than graduate teaching assistants do." Now listen to two students discussing the article.
I just don't know about this decision.
It sort of makes sense to me.
Not to me. I don't understand their reasoning. I mean, what's wrong with small classes? I think that's what students actually prefer. And it's easy to see why.
Yeah. You do get to participate more.
Definitely. You can be more actively involved, get more attention and support. It's just a better way to learn.
Okay. But there is that survey.
I don't know what students they asked, but I know a lot of people who feel just the opposite. I mean, what does experience mean anyway? Sometimes it means you have been teaching the same subject for twenty years and you are probably tired of it by now and maybe not very enthusiastic.
Yeah. That does happen.
Whereas if it's the first time or maybe second you are teaching a class, well, it's going to be more exciting to you. And you are going to communicate that excitement to the people you are teaching. At least that's how I see it.
Task4(阅读+题目):Habituation Reading Part: Habituation Habituation is a form of learning that is quite common among animals. When an animal experiences a situation for the first time, particularly one it considers threatening, it may instinctively respond by running away or by warning other members of its community with alarm calls. Normally, it responds this way each time the situation occurs. HoWe'ver, if through continuous and prolonged exposure the animal learns that the situation is harmless the behavior gradually diminishes. Ultimately, it will stop responding to the situation altogether. Thus, through habituation a natural or instinctive behavior gradually changes.
Task4 Now listen to part of a lecture in a biology class.
Prairie dogs are small animals you're likely to find on wide, relatively flat, grassy areas of land in North America. They tend to live together in large numbers. Now, generally these animals don't come into contact with human beings, but every now and then, they do. So let's assume that some prairie dogs happen to live in an area where human beings frequently come and go.
Now the first time the animals would see a human being, they'd instinctively react by making a sharp barking sound like a dog and jumping up and down, essentially warning or alerting other prairie dogs that are nearby of this potential threat, exactly the same way they'd react if they came upon or were threatened by a snake or a hawk, an animal that preys on them. Their instinctive reaction would be one of fear. They'd keep an eye on the human beings until these scary, possibly threatening individuals are gone. And…they're likely to react this way every time they see a human being.
HoWe'ver, if people pass through the area day after day without threatening them or trying to harm them, well, it turns out that the prairie dogs will gradually stop barking and jumping up and down when they see a human being passing through the area. At some point, they'd stop reacting to humans as though they were a threat.
Task5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
Hey. Jill. What's on your mind?
I'm trying to decide what to do about the paper for my history class. A big part of the assignment is working with original historical documents.
Originals.
Yeah. You know, our library has all kinds of records and books dating back hundreds of years.
Amazing! So is there a problem?
Uh-huh. The librarian just told me that the documents I was planning to use aren't available right now.
They are old newspapers and they were in pretty bad shape, so the library sent them out for repairs, like, restoration work.
So you can't use them.
No. They say they won't be available for at least another two weeks. So I can't work on my paper.
Well, can you change what you are writing about? You know, choose a topic that doesn't involve those documents.
I could. There are plenty of historical topics. Then I could really get working on the paper right away, but… But what?
Well, I've already done a bunch of research on my current topic. I've collected a lot of information and I wouldn't be able to use any of it if I changed my topic.
Well, when did you say the documents, the old newspapers, will be available?
The librarian said two weeks.
So you could just postpone working on the paper, wait until they are available.
Possibly. Unfortunately that would mean doing major work on my paper in the last week of the school term, when I will be working on a lot of other things. If I change the topic, I can really work on the paper right away.
Task6 Now listen to part of a lecture in an environmental studies class.
What happens, biologically speaking, when a major climate change occurs? Well, scientists generally agree that the extinction of various animal and plant species is one very likely effect.
This has happened in the past. An example is, is the disappearance, 35,000 years ago, of a giant Australian bird, called the thunderbird.
Now, now, these birds were so big they couldn't fly. But as I was saying, many scientists are convinced that it was a change in climate that caused this species to become extinct. Here's the evidence. Here's why scientists think it was a climate change.
Researchers have discovered an enormous number of 35,000-year-old thunderbird bones, all together in one spot. The bones were found near an ancient, dried-up lake. Now, it's really rare to find so many bones from the same species in one place, but there it is. You have all these 35,000-year-old thunder bird bones all together near this dried- up lake. So what's the explanation?
Well, many scientists believe that a change in the Australian climate may be behind this. Their hypothesis is, they think that during a very long, dry period, when there was no rainfall, the birds may have flocked together at this lake. You see, during a drought, animals tend to gravitate towards the last few remaining water sources. But then if it still doesn't rain, if the drought lasts too long, the water source may dry up too. And…and if that happens, the animals that have gathered there…well…well...well...they die.
Scientists think, this ancient lake, where they found the bones, was one of the last remaining sources of freshwater during the drought. So that's where all these birds gathered. They survived there for a time, but eventually the lake dried up. And well...that was it. By the time the drought ended, the species was extinct.
TPO43
Task 3 Reading Reading Part: University Makes Changes to Orientation Program Madison University is making a change to the orientation program for first-year students. In the past, as part of orientation, new, incoming students could go on a two-day hiking and camping trip together with other incoming students on the weekend before classes begin. In order to encourage more students to take advantage of the opportunity to get to know one another in an informal setting, the university will now offer a choice of Activities: students will be able to either go hiking or participate in organized group games on campus. Additionally, these Activities will last one day only, not two, a change many students had requested.
Now listen to two students discussing the article M : Interesting, isn't it? I wish they've made this change two years ago when we got here. This program is gonna be much more attractive this way to lots more people.
W: Why?
M : Oh, it' s a question of choice. See, not everyone likes the same things. The way it used to be, if like you didn't like sleeping in the tent, you just didn't participate, lots of people didn't.
W : That's true. I didn't go on the camping trip my first year, hiking and camping isn't my thing. But you know, I did feel I missed out something.
M : Right. Plus, the other reason this is going to work is that you don't have to give up your whole weekend any more. There are other things people need to do their first few days, you know, like buy their books, set up their rooms, prepare for the first day classes, that kind of thing. The big time commitment used to get in the way.
Question: The man expresses his opinion about the change described in the article. Briefly summarize the change.
Then, state his opinion about the change and explain the reasons he gives for holding that opinion.
Task 4 Population Changes Populations of living beings are constantly changing. The number of humans, animals, insects, or plants living in a given area can vary because of two kinds of factors: biotic and abiotic. Biotic factors are living factors that can influence the size of populations, such as predators or other species competing for food.
Abiotic factors are nonliving things in the surrounding environment that can cause population changes, such as weather or sunlight. Biotic and abiotic factors cause continual changes in the number of individuals that make up a population of organisms.
Task4 Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic in a biology class.
Imagine there is a group of mice living in a large field and owls living nearby. Now owls eat mice.
So the number of mice there are in any given time depends upon on the number of owls in the area, because the more owls there are, the more mice get eaten, right?
Now imagine one year there are more owls than usual. Since there are more owls in the area to eat the mice, what do you think will happen to the number of mice? As you can imagine, the number would drop.
There would be fewer mice.
As far as the other factor, we can use rabbits to help understand this one. Imagine a population of rabbits living in an area. These rabbits usually start having their young at the end of winter, after the cold winter weather is gone. And they keep reproducing until the following winter when they will stop again while the cold winter weather lasts.
But let's say this year the winter season is very short, and you know, it starts getting warm much earlier than usual. Since winter this year is so short, the rabbits can start reproducing much earlier. That means the rabbits in that area will have at least one extra reproductive cycle, so of course one extra litter of baby rabbits.
So the number of rabbits in that area would increase a lot.
Task5 Listen to a conversation between the two student editors of a photography magazine called Campus Photo Monthly.
We are in trouble, Barbara. I don't think we can put together next month's issue. There just aren't enough good photos. It's getting harder and harder to put together an issue.
Yeah. And this month is the worst ever! I don't get it. I mean, students are submitting lots of photographs, but I think we've only got fifteen that are worth publishing. And we can't print the magazine with only fifteen photographs.
Well, maybe we're being too selective. What if we use photos that maybe aren't great, but… But that aren't horrible?
Right. I mean some of these photographs we get from beginning photographers may not be the best.
But if we lowered our standards just a bit, we'd have a lot more photos to publish.
Sure. But we'd have to be careful. We don't want to get a reputation for publishing low-quality work.
Well...maybe…you know, maybe we are just publishing too frequently. What if we stop publishing every month and instead, you know, if we just published every two months, we'd have a lot more submissions to choose from so we could pick and choose and still publish only the good ones. I guess. But people on campus sort of expect us to publish every month. I mean, we are Campus Photo Monthly, aren't we?
Task6 Listen to part of a lecture in a biology class.
Okay. So we've been talking about what most animals do when they need food. They simply go out and look for it.
But some animals do something entirely different when they need food. Surprising as it may sound, some animals actually spend a great deal of time taking care of their own food source. They cultivate it, sort of the way human farmers would. So it will keep growing until it's ready for them to use.
Let's start with an animal that cultivates plants. There's a certain fish - it's called a damselfish - that likes to eat a special kind of seaweed. So wherever a patch of this seaweed grows, there will usually be damselfish swimming above and around it. Now the fish are there to provide protection from other plants so the seaweed can grow and then regrow as the damselfish eat it. For example, if other plants start growing over the seaweed blocking sunlight. The damselfish remove those plants by biting off the parts that are getting too tall. So by protecting the seaweed from being overrun and damaged by other plants, the damselfish always have a supply of food ready to use.
Now, some animals don't cultivate plants; they take care of other animals as a source of food. Take ants for instance. There are some species of black ants that care for tiny insects called aphids. These aphids produce a sweet liquid that the ants like to eat. So ants guard the aphids from being eaten by other animals and help feed the aphids. In fact, sometimes the ants even carry aphid eggs back to their own nests and raise the young aphids there. Then the aphids grow and produce the sweet liquid that the ants eat. So the ants make use of the aphids as a reliable source of food.
TPO44
Task 3 Reading Create Student Committee to Decide Funding for Student Organizations I think students should be in charge of deciding which student organizations (for example, the jazz band or the hiking club) receive money from the university. Students should also be in charge of how much money each organization receives. A special committee made up of students could be created to make these decisions. Currently, these funding decisions are made by university administrators, but a student committee would know better than the administrators which organizations are most important to students and most deserving of the university's financial support. I'm sure a lot of students would be interested in serving on the committee, and those who do serve will gain valuable leadership experience.
Sincerely Bill Jones Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
So what do you think of the proposal? I don't like it Why not? Actually, I don't think students are the right people to be making these decisions. They are too close to the situation.
What do you mean?
Well, because students are directly involved in the groups, they can't be as objective, as fair as administrators. I mean, what will prevent students on the committee from just giving money to their friends' groups or favoring the groups they're in themselves. I think having the university administrators make the decisions is more fair.
Well, at least it would be good experience for the students who serve on the committee. Well, that's another thing. I think they'd have a hard time finding students to serve on it. I mean, there are already a number of leadership positions open in various campus groups, but most students just aren't interested in them. That's true. The Student Council doesn't even have a vice president Right. Most students are just too busy. There's no way you are gonna find enough students who are willing to volunteer their time for this committee. It's too big of a time commitment.
Task 4 Scope Creep Businesses that perform services or carry out projects for clients generally come to an agreement with their clients about the extent or scope of a project before beginning the project. HoWe'ver, as a project processes, clients may ask for more than the business originally expected to provide, and the scope of the project may grow larger than intended. This phenomenon is known as scope creep, and it can cause conflict between businesses and their clients. Scope creep is especially common when the terms or conditions of the initial agreement are not clearly defined, and a client may expect more than the business had planned to provide.
Listening Task 4 Now listen to part of a lecture in a business class.
OK, so, for example, I have a friend who owns a company that does construction. His company's often hired to make improvements to someone's house or yard. So, recently, this woman hired him to build a fence around her yard. She said she wanted a wooden fence running all the way around her backyard. She and my friend quickly settled on a price for the job. They basically just made a verbal agreement about the work that will be done without putting any of the agreement in writing.
And so my friend got to work building the fence. So when my friend was almost finished building the fence around the woman's yard, the woman told my friend that she wanted the fence painted white. My friend was surprised by this, because he did not think that he had been hired to also paint the fence. He told the woman this, that he had just been hired to build the fence, not paint it. But the woman said she thought when she hired him to build the fence that this also meant the fence would be painted. They ended up arguing and eventually my friend finally agreed to paint the fence without charging extra just to be nice, but he wasn't happy about it.
Task5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
Hey. Didn't you get a new roommate recently? Linda's her name, right? How's that working out?
Oh. Linda's nice, but...well, there's sort of a problem.
Oh?
Yeah. Our schedules totally conflict. I like to do my studying late at night in our room, but she likes to go to sleep early. So unfortunately, my studying, my typing on the computer, is keeping her awake.
What are you gonna do?
Well, we've talked about it. Linda has to get up early every morning for class, so there's nothing she can do. So as I see it, I've got two options.
What are they?
Well, I could adjust my schedule, start going to bed earlier and doing my studying either in the morning or sometime during the day, the way Linda does.
So you change your daily schedule so it's more like your roommate's?
Yeah. That way I wouldn't be keeping her up at night.
Sure. The thing is I'm not really a morning person when it comes to studying, so I'm not sure how much work I'd get done in the morning or at other times of the day since I tend to be busy then doing other things.
What's your other option?
Well, I could go to the library at night, do my studying there Why not do that? Use the library.
Well, the thing is I prefer the convenience of my own room. The library is okay, but you know, I've got a really comfortable desk chair in my room and all my other stuff's there too, my books, my notes, the stuff I really need to help me study.
Task6 Listen to part of a lecture in a biology class.
So we've been talking about forest fires. And usually when a forest fire occurs, the animals in the area will of course run away, flee as fast as they can so as not to get hurt by the flames. Some animals, though, actually benefit from forest fires and so will seek them out because forest fires can be helpful, can help them fulfill certain survival needs.
Let's discuss two benefits forest fires could have for these animals.
One benefit is that they can make it easier for predators to find food. A forest fire will force animals out of their hiding places and out into the open, which predators take advantage of because fleeing animals are much easier to catch than they normally are when they are hiding. For example, scientists have observed wild turkeys doing this. These birds will go to the edge of a forest fire and wait there in order to catch all the insects running out of the burning forest, which is a much easier way to catch insects than the normal way of pecking for them on the ground. Another benefit forest fires could have is to help provide a good place for the development of young animals. Forest fires can make an otherwise harmful environment more suitable for their development. For example, some trees in the forest are poisonous to beetles. They have a special chemical that keeps beetles away. But after a fire, beetles will seek out these trees because the trees are dead and beetles are able to lay their eggs in the trees without being hurt by the chemical. The young beetles use the trees' nourishment until they mature into adult beetles.
TPO45
Task 3 Reading Close the Coffeehouse Like many people, I was happy when the university opened a coffeehouse. A good coffeehouse is a perfect place to meet people or to study while having a coffee. Unfortunately, our coffeehouse usually empty, so it's not a good place to meet people And the lighting there is very poor, so it's not a good place to study, either.
A coffeehouse seemed like a great idea, but it just hasn't worked out, and the time has come for the university to close it.
Sincerely, Marvin Baker Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
I disagree with his idea.
Why? It doesn't sound like it's doing very much business.
That's probably because he goes during the day, but in the evening… Oh. People go.
A lot of people. Students are really busy during the day, with classes, jobs and study. But at night the place is often pretty full. Students get together there all the time.
Really?
Yeah. It's not until nighttime that students actually have the time to sit down and relax, you know, enjoy a hot drink and something to eat while hanging out or reading for class.
So you can read in there.
Yeah. I mean, he's right that it used to be a problem, but recently they did some renovations and now I think the lighting is as good as it is in the library.
Really?
Yeah. And not just at a few tables, just about every table has got good lighting now. Sounds like this guy doesn't know what he's talking about.
Definitely not.
Task 4 Reading Method of Loci Special techniques, or memory devices, are often used to help us recall information. One technique, the method of loci (i.e., method of location), is particularly helpful for remembering several pieces of information in a particular order. To use this technique, we first imagine a familiar place such as a building or an outdoor area. This familiar place should have a series of landmarks or locations within it that we can imagine walking past in a predictable, logical order. Once the landmarks have been identified in a given order, we assign one piece of the information that we want to later recall to each location. The information should be assigned in the order in which we want to remember it. To later recall the new information in order, we imagine walking through the familiar place, recalling what is stored at each location along the way.
Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic.
So how would this work?
Well, let's say you need to learn the names of the planets, in order, by distance from the Sun. So, first, think about the landmarks you pass as you walk from, say, your dormitory, to the student center. The first one might be the front door of your dormitory, then the big tree in front of the dorm. The next landmark you pass might be the statue in front of the library.
Next, the steps to the science building. You get the idea.
You memorize the major points along the walk, imagining yourself going from the first landmark to the second, the third, and so on. Now, the next thing you do is assign one planet to each of your landmarks in sequence. Since Mercury is the closest planet to the Sun, you assign it to the first landmark, the front door of your dorm. The next planet, Venus, to the tree in front of the dorm. The third planet, Earth, you assign to the third landmark, the statue in front of the library, and so on and so on. And each time you picture the association in your mind as vividly as possible.
Then later, say you are sitting in the classroom taking a test, and you have to write the order of the planets from the Sun. What do you do? You imagine yourself on that familiar walk to the student center, passing each landmark as usual. When you think about walking out of the door of your dorm, you are reminded of Mercury. When you see the beautiful tree in front of the dorm, you'd think of Venus. At each landmark along the way, you recall the next planet and write it down.
Task5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
Hey. Sarah. How is it going?
Not great. It's the student film I've been directing. You know, that project I've been working on for my film class?
Right. You said you were directing a film. So what's wrong?
Well, the project is due in two days. We were supposed to film a final scene today, but it's raining. The scene is supposed to be set outside, with two characters talking in the park on a beautiful sunny day.
Oh no! What are you going to do?
Well, I could rewrite the scene I guess, I could revise it so it takes place inside a building instead, maybe here in the student center somewhere.
Why don't you do that?
I could, but I'm happy with the scene as it's written now. The film has an optimistic happy ending.
That's why I wanted the last scene of the movie to be outside on a bright sunny day, because it sets a positive mood.
Oh… I see. Well, the weather is supposed to be better tomorrow, sunny and warm. Why don't you film that scene tomorrow instead? Thought of that too. But since the project is due the day after tomorrow, I was planning on using tomorrow to review the film and do any final ending, and… you know, all the last- minute details.
That's true. There wouldn't be much time for that. Yeah. Filming tomorrow might mean turning in a project to my professor that's not as polished, not as good as I'd like it to be.
Task6 Listen to part of a lecture in a marine biology class.
So we've talked a little about how fish use senses like vision, touch and so forth, but what I want to talk about now is a special ability some fish have. The ability to produce electricity in their bodies. You are probably familiar with these fish, these fish that send out electric currents from their bodies naturally.
So what's the purpose of this? Well as you might expect, it can serve some important roles in helping fish survive.
First, fish, like all animals, need food to survive. Well, the ability to produce electricity helps some fish to capture prey, you know, other organisms in the water that they eat. Take the electric eel for example. The eel produces a strong electric current in its body. When the eel comes into contact with one of the smaller fish it depends on for food, the electric current that it sends out shocks the smaller fish and paralyzes it. It's not able to get away from the eel. The eel captures the fish easily and can eat it at its leisure. So this ability to use electricity to capture prey ensures that the eel gets the food it needs to survive.
The ability to produce electricity also helps fish to successfully navigate their environment by detecting nearby objects. Some fish have poorly developed eyes. And the water they live in can be muddy and dark.
Now, there's a fish called the knife fish that produces electricity. This creates an electric field around the knife fish's body. When the knife fish swims close to, say a rock, it sends a disturbance, um, an interference in its electric field. The fish then realizes that there's a rock nearby and that it has to avoid crashing into it.
Once this happens, the knife fish swims away from the rock and thus avoids harming itself.
TPO46
Task 3 Reading No More Posters Outside the Student Center Traditionally, students have been permitted to put up posters advertising events, clubs, and activities on the concrete wall outside the main entrance to the student center. Beginning next semester, hoWe'ver, students will no longer be allowed to attach anything to the front of the building. According to a university official, the new policy is part of an effort to improve the campus's appearance. "The posters on the wall make the building unattractive," he said, "so they have to come down." He added that posters can instead be displayed in the dining hall: "Students can use the bulletin board in the dining hall for posters, so the policy change should not be a problem.
Task3 Now listen to two students discussing the article.
It's really too bad about this new policy.
Why do you say that?
Well, I mean, you don't notice it so much now, but if you take a good look at that building, it's pretty boring, just your basic square building with gray concrete walls and no kind of ornamentation or anything to make it interesting.
Yes. I guess that's true now that I think about it.
Yeah. The stuff that goes up there now, a lot of it is artistic and colorful, it gives the building character and personality.
True.
Plus, it's always changing and that's cool too. Yeah. You are right. So what's gonna be left? A boring old concrete wall.
Yeah. I guess it will be kind of plain.
Yeah. And the idea about the dining hall...not everybody eats there. A lot of students eat at the Snack Bar or off campus. Some students bring lunch from home and eat outside under the trees. That's true. I never eat in the dining hall Okay. See what I mean? So how are you going to see those announcements?
I won't. I rest my case.
Task 4 Reading Warning Coloration Many animals have defense mechanisms that help protect them from predators. In some cases, these animals have distinct coloring that signals predators of the presence of such defenses. This type of coloring is called warning coloration. If a predator does not recognize the meaning of this coloration and attacks, it may suffer significant discomfort or injury when its would-be prey employs its defense mechanism. As a result, the predator learns to associate the warning coloration with negative consequences, and will from that point forward avoid attacking animals that have that coloration.
Now listen to part of a lecture in a biology class.
We have a good example of this with the skunk. As most of you know, the skunk is a furry little mammal that can be found throughout North America. Skunks have a very distinctive marking. Their body is mostly black, and they have a big white stripe that runs from the top of their head all the way down their back and along their big bushy tail. So they're very easy to see and very easy to recognize even from a distance.
Skunks also have special glands under their tail that produce a terrible, smelling liquid. And when skunks are approached by a predator, they lift their tail and spray the predator with this liquid. For example, let's say a wolf is preparing to attack a skunk. As the wolf approaches, the skunk lifts its tail and sprays the wolf. That's very very unpleasant for the wolf because it's now covered with this repulsive, foul-smelling liquid. The wolf doesn't want to be sprayed again, so it backs off and leaves the skunk alone. And from then on, whenever that wolf sees a furry, little black body with a big white stripe running from its head to its tail, it'll recall that terrible smell and it'll be sure to stay far away.
Task5 Hey. Bob. (I've) been meaning to ask how's that film class going?
Great! And guess what, there's a special class meeting tomorrow night to view an Alfred Hitchcock film.
There will be a discussion after the film. Hitchcock films are great. You're gonna be there, right? I don't know.
There's a conflict.
What's that?
Well, I'm supposed to have dinner at the dining hall with my cousin. He is coming tomorrow to spend the day on campus and check out the university, trying to decide whether to enroll in classes here next year.
Well, maybe I can help. I eat at the dining hall every night. So if you want, he can come to dinner with me and some friends of mine.
Hmm...that's very nice of you. If would help him if he got to talk to a few different people about campus life.
Okay. Let's do that.
Well, the thing is: he's kind of shy and he might be uncomfortable with people he doesn't know. And I do want him to enjoy himself here.
Hey. We'll be nice. Anyway, do you have a better idea?
Well, I can skip the film and have dinner with my cousin as planned. I'd rent the film and watch it later.
But what about the discussion?
I'd miss that and it could be very interesting.
Well, let me know when you decide.
Task6 When we think about the past, when we try to remember the past, we remember same things better than others. Why is that?
Well, there are a few different explanations.
One explanation is that we remember something better if we already have some previous knowledge about it, some previous understanding of it. For example, let's say you are going to go to a classical music concert. If you don't know anything about classical music before you go to the concert, you probably won't remember many details of the concert later on. For example, if somebody asks you about the concert a year later, you probably won't remember what pieces the orchestra played, what order they played them in and so on. On the other hand, if you already know a lot about classical music before you go to the concert, for example, if you've been studying and playing classical music for many years, it's probably going to be much easier for you to recall the details of the concert later on. Another explanation is that we remember better when there's something unusual or different about what we are trying to remember. For example, let's say you are in a class at a university, a big class with over a hundred students in it. A year later, which of those a hundred students are you mostly likely to remember? Probably the ones who were unusual or different in some way, maybe a man who was exceptionally tall, or a woman who was exceptionally intelligent. The fact that these students were somehow different from the other students will make them easier to remember.
TPO47
Task3 Reading Professor Evaluations The university requires students to complete written evaluations of their professors at the end of each course taught during the semester. But current system is private, since only the professors actually read the evaluations once the student submit them. I suggest that the university publish these evaluation online for everyone to read. Both professors and students would benefit from having these evaluation published.
Professor would feel more motivated to improve their teaching if they knew that their evaluations were publicly available to all students. In addition, prospective students could read the evaluation and make more informed decisions about which classes they want to take.
Sincerely Chris Jacobs Now listen to two students discussing the letter Did you see this?
Yeah. But I don't think it'll work Why not?
Well, I don't think professors would be too happy to have their teaching styles publicly criticized.
Besides they might not even bother reading the online evaluations if they think there will be negative criticism in them.
You really think that will happen?
Sure. And so the professor won't take them seriously or be influenced in any way. Nothing's going to change.
Okay. But at least students who might take their courses in the future will read them That's true. But students who write the evaluations usually do it on the last day of class. And they're all in a hurry to leave.
They don't want to bother spending much time on them, so they don't say anything specific or helpful about the professor or the course.
I see what you mean.
So this whole idea may not work at all.
Task 4 Reactance People all ages generally prefer to have as much freedom as possible in determining their behavior. When individuals feel that their actions are being unfairly limited, they often attempt to restore freedom by directly contradicting or opposing the rule of regulation that threatened their freedom. Both children and adults demonstrate behaviors that are the results of their urge to restore freedom. This reaction, termed 'reactance' by psychologists, come from an individual's desire to reestablish freedom and control of a situation.
Listen to part of a lecture on this topic in a psychology class.
Think about when you were a kid. Imagine you like this one playground. You play there a lot, have lots of fun, you know. Okay. Now imagine that one day, for no apparent reason, your parents decide that they don't want you playing there anymore. You are not allowed to go there anymore. Of course you're not gonna like that one bit. It's not fair. And now that you are not allowed, you want to play there even more than before. So you sneak over there anyway. You go to this playground despite your parents' rules.
Here`s another example.
There was a town that passed a law that banned the sale of a certain kind of soap. There was an ingredient in this soap that was harmful for the environment. So stores weren't allowed the sell the soap anymore. Keep in mind that this ingredient had no effect whatsoever on this soap's ability to clean things.
None, but people found out about the upcoming restriction and got upset. They thought they should be able to buy whatever soap they wanted. It wasn't right to take this soap away. And a week before the law went into effect, what happened? People went and bought a whole lot of this particular soap, way mare than they would have in another circumstance.
Task5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
How is it going? Julie.
Not too good. You know the student art exhibit next week?
No. What's that? It's where a few art students are chosen to show apiece of artwork in the student center for people to see.
Oh! Cool. You were chosen?
Yeah. Except I just found out that I can't use the painting I did for it.
Why not?
Because it's too big.
I'm into working on a really large scale now. And the painting I did for this show is huge. It's like a three-meter wide canvas, but each artist only gets a small amount of wall space.
The organizers can't make an exception?
No. They said it wouldn't be fair to the other students if they let me have more space That's too bad. What are you going to do?
I don't know. I could give them an older painting. I do have one that's small enough.
Great! Yeah. It's a nice painting and all. It's just that I did it a while ago. My technique has improved a lot since then. So it wouldn't be my best work or anything. I don't think it's as good as what I'm doing now.
Well, could you maybe do a new painting? A smaller one, by next week, for the show?
Yeah. I could. That would be something fresh, something I'd be more proud of. But I'm really busy right now. I've got some exams coming up that I really need to study for.
Task6 Listen to part of a lecture in a history class.
Professor When early humans wanted to eat meat, they hunted wild animals. That's how humans got meat for thousands of years. But then around 10,000 years ago, humans began to domesticate animals, that is, they began to control animals, to feed them, to raise them. And the domestication of animals had a number of benefits for early humans. Let's talk about a couple of these benefits.
One benefit of animal domestication was that it provided early humans with a more consistent and reliable source of meat. When early humans hunted wild animals, sometimes they were able to find and catch the animals, but other times they weren't. So the wild animals were not a reliable source of meat. But with domesticated animals, meat was always available.
For example, goats were one of the first animals to be domesticated. They were easily controlled and organized into herds led by a person, a shepherd. So they could accompany groups of people as they moved from place to place. And whenever the people needed meat, they could eat the goats. They were always available.
Another benefit of animal domestication was that domesticated animals could supply a variety of foods other than meat. When early humans hunted wild animals, the only kind of food they got was meat. But domesticated animals were able to supply, in addition to meat, other kinds of food products.
For example, let's take a look again at domesticated goats. Live goats produce milk, so early humans could collect the milk and drink it. And they could also process the milk and turn it into other kinds of food, like yogurt and cheese, which could be stored.
TPO48
Task 3 Reading An Art Museum at the University?
Many universities have their own art museums, with collections of paintings and sculptures by well-known artists. I think our university should create a similar museum on our own campus. Such a museum would give our students an opportunity to learn to appreciate high-quality fine art. It would be a great way for us to see artworks that we might not have access to other wise. In order to pay for the museum, the university could write letters to alumni asking them to donate money to help build the museum. I'm sure many former students love art and would be glad to donate money to help the university build a museum here.
Sincerely Diane Miller Listen to two students discussing the letter.
Did you see this letter?
Yeah. It's a nice idea, but it'll never happen.
Why do you say that?
Well, first of all, you can get on a bus right here on campus and in half an hour, you are downtown at the county art museum.
That's true.
And if you show you student ID card, it only costs like two bucks to get in.
Yeah. In fact, on Mondays, students get in for free.
Right. And you can see some of the greatest art in the world there. For example, you know Rembrandt, the famous Dutch painter?
Yeah.
Well, right now they're showing something like twenty of his paintings Wow.
Yeah. And you know, it's true. We do have a lot of very generous alumni. But we're already asking them for help building a new student center and a new library. And those are both very expensive projects.
Yeah. That's right.
So I don't think we can expect them to donate much money for anything else anytime soon, especially for something we don't really need.
Task 4 Optimal Foraging Food provides animals with the energy they need to survive. HoWe'ver, animals also lose energy in the process of obtaining, or foraging, for food. Therefore, in order to conserve energy, many animals behave in ways that minimize the energy they expend in the foraging process while at the same time maximizing their nutritional benefits. This energy-efficient approach to obtaining food is known as optimal foraging. The practice of optimal foraging allows animals to expend the least possible amount of energy while at the same time obtaining prey with high food value that will provide them with necessary nutrients.
Optimal Foraging Now listen to part of a lecture from a biology class.
All right. So I've got a good example of this.
There's a bird, a species of crow, that lives near the water and it feeds on a type of shellfish that has a hard outer shell. In order to eat the shellfish, the bird has to crack open its hard shell. So when this bird feeds, what it does is: it dives down out of the air into shallow water, grabs a shellfish in its mouth, then carries the shellfish up in the air. It then drops the shellfish, lets it fall onto the rocks below. When the shellfish hits the rocks, its shell cracks and splits open and the bird can eat it.
Now, this bird, this crow, doesn't just swoop down, grab the first shellfish it sees and then fly up to any height and let it fall. Instead, it does two things.
First, it carefully selects only the biggest shellfish. That means it's going to get the biggest possible meal for its efforts. Okay?
Second, it carries the shellfish up to a specific height, about five meters, and drops it from there. If the bird dropped the shellfish from a lower height, it would have to pick it up and drop it too many times in order to break the shell. On the other hand, if the bird carried the shellfish up to a higher altitude, an altitude higher than it's necessary to crack the shell, it would be wasting energy. So this bird expends just the right amount of energy-no more no less-that it needs to obtain just the right kind of food.
Task5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
Hey. Cindy. You look happy. Making plans for the summer vacation?
I'm just glad the semester is finally over. I just finished my final exam, so I'm taking off for summer vacation tomorrow. Aren't you?
I wish.
What do you mean?
I have to rewrite the lab report for my biology class. I guess I did it all wrong. So the professor's making me rewrite it before he'll submit a final grade.
I guess that's better than if he just gave you a bad grade on it, right?
I guess so. But I was planning on leaving town tomorrow too, and now I'm not sure I can. I spoke with the professor and he gave me two options. I can either turn in the revised report in one week and get my grade, or he said I can wait, you know, taking incomplete in the class and submit the paper next semester in the fall.
So are you going to stay around to revise the report?
I could. I'd get the grade for the class on time and I wouldn't have to think about it anymore. But there's a family reunion this weekend. I was really looking forward to it. If I stay around to revise the report, I'll miss the reunion.
Well, maybe you should take your time and work on the report over the summer. You can submit it when you return in the fall semester and get your grade then.
That would be fine, but what if I need materials from the library to revise the report? I don't know if I'II be able to find the materials at the library at home.
Hmm… Task6 Listen to part of a lecture in a business class.
Okay. So we have been discussing how companies use advertising to help sell their products. Now although advertisements can benefit companies, there are people who are critical of advertising because of certain environmental problems it can cause. So let's talk about two ways advertising can be seen to negatively affect the environment.
One way is by wasting natural resources, like trees, by advertising to consumers who do not have a need for the product or service. The advertisement is irrelevant or useless for them. For instance, a piece of mail I got advertising a kitchen renovation service. A whole big booklet, lots of paper, about different ways to remodel your kitchen: changing the floors, adding new cupboards or appliances, but this was all a lot of wasted paper, wasted trees because I don't even own my place. I rent an apartment. So a kitchen renovation service is irrelevant to me. I can't use it. And I'm sure that booklet was mailed to lots of other people who also rent and who just threw the booklet into trash because they have no need for a kitchen renovation.
Now, additionally, advertising can have a negative effect on the natural beauty of the environment.
People are often less able to enjoy the beauty of the natural surroundings if there are large advertisements blocking their view of the landscape or distracting them from the natural beauty around them. Let's face it.
No matter how beautiful an area of nature is to begin with, its beauty is damaged by visible advertisements.
So...like, for example, this happens with big advertisements on the side of roads, huge billboards. Say there's a road passing through a beautiful area in the mountains, but there are all these big billboards advertising restaurants and products along the side of the road. The land is naturally very beautiful, but you can't fully appreciate it. The big billboard advertisements get in the way.
TPO49
Task 3 Reading Make Textbook List Available Earlier Students always have to wait until the beginning of the semester to find out which textbooks they will need for their new courses. But since a lot of students register early for their courses, I think that the list of textbooks for each course should be available immediately at the time of registration. This would give students more time to shop around to find less expensive textbooks. And it would also allow them to start work on the reading for their new courses early.
Sincerely, Alexandra Brown Listening Man Hey，did you see Alexandra's letter? Girl Yeah, what do you think?
Man Well, ifs great. She really makes some good points, like the thing with the university bookstore is, if you buy a brand new textbook, it can be pretty expensive and they usually have only a few used textbooks around.
They're cheaper of course but they sell out quickly.
Girl That's true.
Man So this would give students time to look around on their own. You know, maybe they could find the books they need online, get books a few months ahead of time using the internet.
Girl I agree.
Man So this way students might be able to save a little money.
Girl Right, so what do you think about the second point, about the reading assignments?
Man I agree with that, too. It just makes a lot of sense, because things get really busy when the semester first starts and it can be hard to find time to keep up with all of the assignments, but students usually have some free time right before the start of the semester.
Girl So we'd have a good opportunity to do some preparation.
Man Exactly.
Task 4 阅读文本： Procedural Memory The memories people form when they learn names and facts are different from the memories they form when they learn how to perform a task. These memories of performing particular actions are called procedural memories. Procedural memories are memories of the process of performing a task that become automatic with practice. Once a task has been practiced, or repeated many times, procedural memories are established. These procedural memories allow people to perform the action automatically and to recall it relatively easily many years later.
听力文本： Narrator: Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic from a psychology class.
Professor: I've experienced this kind of thing myself. When I was a boy, I took guitar lessons. And in my first lessons, my guitar teacher, she showed me how to hold the guitar and how to place my fingers on the strings. Every day when I got home, I would play the guitar for hours. And after a couple years spending time like this playing at home, I can just pick up my guitar and play music without thinking about it.
But after college, I stopped playing. And for years, I never played or even picked up a guitar. Then the other day I found my old guitar. I was amazed to discover that when I picked it up I knew how to play, even though I hadn't played for years. I just picked it up and right away I found that I still knew where to place my fingers to play the right notes.
Now I couldn't explain to you exactly how I was moving each finger or exactly why I had to press the string at one point and not another, but I could still play my favorite songs.
Task 5 听力文本： Narrator: Listen to a conversation between two students.
Man: Hey, Lisa, how are you? Any big plans for summer break?
Girl: Well, I thought I knew what my plans were... But now I'm not sure.
Man: How come?
Girl: Well, you know how we are required to take a foreign language course before we graduate.
Man: Yeah.
Girl: I want to take it this summer since I am graduating next year and I will have a busy course schedule, so I signed to take a Russian course online over the summer because I am hoping to take a trip to Russia at some point.
Man: Online? That's cool. You wouldn't have to stay around campus and you could do it for home.
Girl: Exactly. You do everything over the internet, but not enough people signed up for the class so they cancelled it. Now I don't know what to do, l still need to fulfill the requirement.
Man: Wow, could you take a Russian class on campus this summer instead of the online course?
Girl: Yeah, there is a regular Russian class being offered on campus and it has space, so I could sign up and just stay in the dorms this summer and live on campus.
Man: OK.
Girl: I was looking forward to being home the summer, though, and spending some time with my family.
My sister is coming back from China, she's working there for a year and I haven't seen her.
Man: Oh, that's disappointing.
Girl: I checked though and I could take a different language course online. There is one thing offered in Spanish.
Man: Great! So why don't you just do that, you'd be able to spend time with your sister.
Girl: Yeah, but I am not that excited by taking Spanish. I thought it would be fun to learn Russian. It's more interesting to me, though at least this way I could get the requirement out of the way. So, I don't know...
Task 6 听力文本： Narrator: Listen to part of a lecture in a biology class.
Professor: So of course many animals live in groups with others of their species. And there are benefits to living together in groups. It can help animals survive. But there are also certain disadvantages. So today we are going to talk about two disadvantages of living in groups for animals.
One disadvantage is that animals that live in groups may be more visible to predators. If there's a big group of animals, predators are more likely to spot them than they would an individual animal on its own. So sometimes animals in a group may be more vulnerable to being captured by predators. For instance, Sardines, really small fish, swim in groups, and other larger ocean animals, like some kind of whales, eat them.
So while a whale probably wouldn't notice one Sardine, it would see a group of Sardines very easily and thus be able to capture them for food.
Another disadvantage has to do with caring for the young. In a large group, there are a lot of young animals around and it can be difficult for animals to find or identify their own young. And they may end up taking care of other animals to young instead. So their own young may not get the care they need. For example, some bats live in caves. And with one type of bat, millions of them live together in the same cave.
And with young bats so crowded together in the cave. It's sometimes hard for a mother bat to find her babies. So when a mother bat returns from finding food to feed her babies, she might end up feeding the babies of another mother bat, meaning her own babies don't get fed.
问题： Using points and examples from the lecture, explain two disadvantages of living in groups for animals.
TPO50
Task 3 Reading Response to the Plan for an Additional Lighting System I oppose the university's plan to purchase an additional outdoor lighting system. The university says it would make our historic campus more attractive by illuminating our buildings at night. However, the university would spend an extra $1,000 per month for electricity. Instead, I recommend the money be used to complete the library renovation project as quickly as possible.
That's not the only reason we shouldn't get the new system. These powerful lights would brighten the sky as well as the buildings and seriously interfere with the use of our astronomy equipment. Our academic mission must come first—and the practice of astronomy is done best when the sky is darkest.
—R. N. Heinrich, Professor of Astronomy Listening Student A I totally agree with the letter.
Student B How come? Don't you think the campus will look prettier at night?
Student A Well, it might make the buildings look nice at night, but why should we waste so much money on something we really don't need, just for looks? There are more important things than that.
Student B I can see your point.
Student A I mean, how long has that library project been going on?
Student B Yea, the whole third floor has been closed for the last few months.
Student A Exactly and just last night I had my astronomy class with professor Heinrich, he told us something that was totally disappointing. We've been tracking a comet all semester long and he says that if the university's plan goes through, we won't be able to see the comet through the telescopes anymore.
Student B That's so sad. You chose this school just because (of) the astronomy program, didn't you?
Student A Yea, it's such a good program, but if it's too bright around here at night, we'll have to go back to looking at pictures of comets in the textbook. You could tell professor Heinrich is disappointed too. Ifs the hands-on experience that gets everyone all excited.
Task 4 Reading State-dependent Memory When learning something new, people are aware (consciously or unconsciously) of the environment in which their learning takes place. This learning environment includes the physical setting, the time of day, and even the people who are present during learning. Studies have shown that when people later need to remember information they have learned, their ability to do so is affected by their current environment. If the environment is the same or similar to the original learning environment, recall the ability to remember will be easier and more successful. Psychologists refer to this as state-dependent memory.
Listening Now listen to part of a lecture on this topic in a psychology class.
Professor When I was a student in middle school, some of my classmates and I got an assignment to do a group presentation on tropical plants. Okay, and as part of this assignment we needed to memorize the names, you know, and certain key characteristics of the plants. Then on the morning the assignment was given our teacher gave us time to work on the presentation during class, right there in the classroom. So there we were, during the school day, in our usual classroom, studying and memorizing the information, and our teacher and the other kids in the class were all there too. Okay.
So then later on the night before the presentation I invited my group members over to my house to do some final studying. And there we were, it was after dark, my parents and my brother were in the next room watching TV and no one else was around. It felt pretty different from working in the classroom with all our schoolmates around, like it was on that morning when we spent time learning the information. Anyway at my house, when we tried to remember the plant information, we got a little worried, suddenly it was more difficult to remember all the names and different facts. But the next morning when we were back in the classroom, the presentation actually went very smoothly. It was easier for us to remember what we needed to talk about.
Task 5 Listen to a conversation between a student and his academic advisor. Advisor So how's the semester going so far?
Student Well Tm having some trouble. I need some advice.
Advisor Okay.
Student Well I'm taking advanced chemistry and it's turning out to be a lot more work than I expected especially because we have to put in so much time in the laboratory.
Advisor Okay.
Student Yeah, I really like it but my schedule is just too full, because, you know, Tm also writing a weekly editorial for the campus newspaper, and now, with advanced chemistry, ifs too much.
Advisor That's right. Yes, I enjoy reading your editorials. Well, how about instead of writing an editorial every week, you only write one every two weeks. Then next semester you go back to writing it every week.
Student It is hard to keep up with those weekly deadlines and that would give me the extra time I need for advanced chemistry, but my editorial has so many readers. Ifs the first thing a lot of people read and Td hate to disappoint them.
Advisor Okay. Well, there is another possibility. You'll be required to take a science course, but you don't have to take an advanced course. So you could switch to a less challenging course: basic chemistry.
Student I guess the basic course would take up less time.
Advisor Definitely. For one thing you^ spend much less time in the laboratory.
Student That's an interesting idea, but I love the challenge of the advanced course. I feel like Tm learning so much.
Task 6 Professor So, we've been talking about how animals have developed different ways of surviving and one way is from having developed special physical characteristics that help protect them from the dangers in their environment. These are known as "protective adaptations” and there are two different kinds. Some animals have “defensive adaptations” and that means they protect themselves by having body structures that make it hard for predators to get at them, and other animals have "offensive adaptations”，body structures that keep predators away.
Alright. Let's talk with the turtle. It's a good example of an animal with a defensive adaptation. Since you've probably all seen turtles you already know that it has a hard shell that covers its back and vital organs. Its shell is its special characteristic, and ifs so strong it won't break or split open, making it very hard for a predators to get at it. The turtle also has a flexible neck so it can pull its head down under its shell. Its legs can also fold up under the shell and provide more protection still.
Alright, but now let's talk about the porcupine. That's an animal that protects itself with an offensive adaptation by threatening a predator with physical harm. In case you haven't seen a porcupine recently, just imagine an animal with a small body that is covered with thousands of long sharp needlelike quills.
Those quills are its special physical characteristic. So whenever a predator gets too near, when it brushes against the porcupine, those sharp quills come loose and become imbedded in the predator's skin. So predators know enough to stay away because they see the porcupine's threatening quills and they don't want to risk being hurt by them.
TPO51
Task 3 Reading University Should Build a Parking Lot for the Humanities Building I think the university should consider building a parking lot near the humanities building. Right now there's only street parking available, and it isn't enough. Whenever I look for a spot to park in the street near the humanities building, I can't find one. A parking lot for the humanities building would solve that problem.
Also, there's a wooded area behind the building that would make an ideal location for the parking lot. The university could just clear away the trees and build a lot - the space is already there for it.
Sincerely, Joe Simmons Listening Now, listen to two students discussing the letter.
M: Hey, Mary. Did you see this? You think he's right?
W: No. I don't agree with him.
M: How come?
W: Well, because it's not like the street out front is the only space you can park. You can also park at the dining hall, which is only a couple of blocks away or the library, which is a few blocks in the other direction.
He doesn't mention that.
M: That's true. I guess there are other lots nearby.
W: Yeah, so there's not really a need for it. Students may have to walk a little but that's ok. I don't think there always needs to be a spot right outside the building you're going to.
M: That's true.
W: But the other problem I have with it is even if they went ahead with his idea, it's the location he suggests.
They can't just clear away those trees, that's one of the only wooded areas left on campus. We don't have many trees here and they should preserve the ones we have.
M: Yeah, it is pretty.
W: Well, yeah, and sometimes students like to sit out there in the shade on a nice day to study or read under the trees. They should leave it alone, not destroy it to make away for something we don't need.
Task 4 Reading Image Advertising When companies advertise a product, they depend on the use of images as well as words to achieve their goal of increasing sales. An image can be a symbol, character, or design - any visual figure or representation that will link the company with their product in the consumer's mind. Typically the image is a positive, entertaining one that consumers enjoy so much that it makes them want to buy the product in the future.
The image also tends to be easy to remember even though it is usually something not normally or logically associated with the product.
Listening Now listen to part of a lecture in a marketing class.
You know, there are lots of different companies out there that make and sell cookies or biscuits. But there is one company, Big Bear Cookies, that has used this technique to sell more cookies than all its competitors.
How? Well, the company has this animal character called Big Bear that it uses in all the advertising. The picture of the bear on its cookie boxes and the character of the bear also appears in its TV commercials. Oh, and of course, the cookies themselves are shaped like big bear. Now most people who eat big bear cookies are children and well they enjoy the bear and think it' s really entertaining and fun. In the TV commercials, for example, he's always saying funny things and dancing around in a lively, comical way. So big bear makes children feel good about the companies' cookies, makes children want to get them. And you know, the real interesting thing is that the figure of big bear stays in people' s minds and makes them think of cookies even though bears usually don't have anything to do with cookies. I mean bears certainly don't make or eat cookies, right? Yet, big bear is a character that people, particularly children, don't seem to forget because year after year Big Bear Cookies sells more cookies than any other company.
Task 5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
M: What's up, Karen?
W: Oh, hey, Bill. I'm just trying to figure out what to do.
M: About what?
W: Well, I volunteer at the local elementary school because, you know, I'm an education major and I help children with homework there after school. We also plan some fun activities with them on weekends.
M: Cool.
W: Yeah, it's a great program and the kids really love it. So I was planning to take them on a picnic outside tomorrow. I was going to bring along fruit, sandwiches and have their parents drop them off at the park so we can all eat together.
M: Sounds like fun as long as the weather's good.
W: Well, that's the thing. Turns out it's supposed to rain all day tomorrow.
M: Ah oh, what are you gonna do?
W: That's what I'm trying to figure out. I could reschedule the picnic, call everyone tonight and see if they could come to the park next weekend. The weather would probably be better then but I doubt they'd all be able to make it.
M: Yeah, I see what you mean. Some of them might miss out.
W: Or, you know, I could have their parents drop them off at a local restaurant and have everyone meet there instead of doing a picnic.
M: Right, in that way, you could still do it tomorrow so you wouldn't have to cancel.
W: But the thing is that it may not be as much fun to eat inside because you know it wouldn't really be a picnic then.
Task 6 Listen to part of a lecture in a biology class.
Ok, so, many animals benefit from living in groups. It provides them with protection from predators and with social companionship. So it's important for these animals to maintain their group's unity. They need ways to either avoid conflicts or if they do occur to resolve them peacefully. To help them achieve this, many animals use what are called display behaviors. These are behaviors that are mostly for show, symbolic behaviors that send a message to the other animals and help maintain their group' s unity. One way is through the use of threatening display behaviors. Threatening display behaviors are used to communicate a warning but they aren't meant to really harm other animals; rather they help animals avoid fights. Some monkeys, like Baboons for instance, frequently use threatening display behaviors. Like, well let's say, two Baboons find some fruit and they both want it. One Baboon, maybe the first Baboon to see the fruit, might stare at the other one and make threatening noises, grunts to let the other Baboon know it wants the fruit.
Because the other Baboon understands the meaning of stares and grunts, it can give up the fruit without a fight. And this behavior benefits the group by preventing conflict. But sometimes physical fights do occur and animals need a way to reconcile afterwards to make up to ensure that everyone in the group continues to get along. In these cases, an animal might use friendly display behavior to restore group unity. Let's return to the Baboon example. Let's say the two Baboons do end up getting into a physical fight over the fruit. After the conflict, the two animals need a way to resolve things. So what they do is approach each other while making friendly noises and may even hug each other as if to say everything is ok now, I'm not angry with you anymore. And through this friendly display behaviors, friendly noises or hugs, the Baboons can make up and the group can go back to normal.
TPO52
Task 3 Reading Graduation speaker should be a business leader I think the university should invite a business leader to speak at this year's graduation ceremony - perhaps an executive from one of the large corporations in the area. For students, business leaders are excellent role models because they represent the meaning of professional success. They influence people every day, make important decisions, and have achieved impressive salaries. Furthermore, inviting a business executive will help reinforce to the community that our business program is the biggest and best one in the state.
Prospective students will read about the speech and will remember that our university has a strong and attractive business program.
Sincerely, Ryan Brown Listening Now listen to two students discussing the letter.
Man: Hey, Kala, did you see Ryan's letter in the paper?
Woman: Yeah. But I have to say I disagree with his proposal.
Man: Oh, yeah?
Woman: You know, it seems like it's always business people who speak at graduation, at least every year I' ve been here, it's always business person speaking.
Man: Think we could do some variety?
Woman: I think other professions can be considered, influential and successful, like say teachers.
Man: Teachers are certainly influential and have an important role in the community.
Woman: Yeah. The school should consider having someone from another profession speak since business leaders always do it.
Man: Yeah. But what about his point about it being good for the business program?
Woman: Well, like Ryan said, that program is already quite big and well-known. It doesn't really need the extra attention or free advertising that a graduation speaker would bring.
Man: En…That's true.
Woman: I think our education program could really benefit from the free publicity. It' s a great teacher training program but it's not as well-known. It'd be great if local teachers could draw attention to it, which would definitely happen in a speech like that.
Task 4 Reading Impression Management According to some sociologists, as we go about our lives, we try to control or manage the impression that we make on others in social situations. When we do this, we are practicing what sociologists call impression management. Even in everyday, ordinary interactions, we make special preparations - sometimes unconsciously - to convey certain Information about ourselves that influences how others perceive us. These preparations often involve our personal appearance - how we look during the social interaction - as well as the social setting, which is the place where the social interaction occurs.
Listening Now listen to part of a lecture in a sociology class on this topic.
Professor: Have you noticed how…when a student gives a class presentation, it might dress just a little more formally than usual? Eh…for example, if you usually wear jeans and a T-shirt to class, you might wear nicer pants, a nicer shirt or sweater because you know, you are dressing up, you want people to know, even before you begin speaking, that you take this presentation seriously, that you've come prepared, that you are a responsible student, that you've got a good presentation for us. You get the idea. Or, Uh, here is another example. There was this one time when I knew I was going to be giving…the president of the University a ride. It was to a meeting across town. Anyway, the day before I was supposed to give him a ride, I wasn't even aware of doing this. But the day before I was supposed to give him a ride, I took the trash out of the back seat and even had the car washed. I suppose I was thinking back on my mind that you know, if my car was neat and tidy, the president would think that I was responsible and respectful. And then to top it up, when the president got in the car, I changed the radio to a classical station. Now I don't even like classical music, I guess I must be thinking that the classic music would seem more sophisticated.
Task 5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
Woman: Hey Jim, know what you are doing yet this summer?
Man: Yeah, I get this chemistry internship lined up. I'm gonna be helping my lab professor with a research experiment.
Woman: How cool!Man: I know. I want to work in a chemistry lab after I graduate, so this will be a great experience.Woman: Sounds like you are all set.
Man: Em…not quite. Here's a problem. You see, the internship doesn't pay and I really need to earn money this summer.
Woman: Well, I read the campus bookstore needs help this summer. Maybe you could work at the lab during the week and at the bookstore on the weekends.
Man: Maybe, but then I'll be working all the time. I'll hardly have any time to relax all summer.
Woman: True. But here's a thought. Why not ask your professor if you can share the internship with another person?
Man: You know, now that you mention it. Other summer interns have done this and the professors were fine with it.
Woman: Right. So you could still earn money on days when you didn't have to be at the lab.
Man: Yeah, sounds good. The only drawback is that I might not learn as much as I would if I were actually in the lab every day and could follow the results of the experiment.
Woman: I know, but it might be worth a try.
Task 6 Listen to part of a lecture in an environmental science class.
OK, so what are some of the most effective public policies when it comes to fighting environmental problems? There are a lot of different approaches but…this is, in my opinion, too often we underestimate how much can be accomplished just by appealing to people's sense of moral duty, to their civic duty. In other words, getting people to voluntarily stop polluting because, well just because it' s the right thing to do.
These programs that try to get people to voluntarily stop doing things that hurt the environment are called moral suasion. Now, obviously this type of approach won't be effective for all problems but it will solve some. For some environmental concerns, moral suasion has been very effective. The classic case is, well,Smokey the Bear. Now, don' t laugh. When the forest service first came out with the “Smokey the Bear” campaign, it may have seemed a little childish. You remember the character, the bear dressed up like a foreign stranger, saying things like please don' t hurt my animal friends or please don' t start forest fires. Well, it worked. It worked because it made people more sensitive to these problems. This “Smokey the Bear ” campaign, this kind of campaign in general raises people's awareness of the problem and appeals to their sense of moral duty, to do the right thing. Another good example of this is recycling. In the early days of recycling, local community promoted these voluntary efforts. They make people aware of the need to reduce the amount of garbage by recycling. They provided neighborhoods with containers to put their glass and newspapers in instead of throwing them away. Some people started doing it, and others followed. Maybe people thought I have this recycling container, my neighbor is doing it, I should do it too. Nowadays, of course, everyone recycles. The point is, in order to get people to really do it, to get high rates of compliance, the program heavily relied on moral suasion.
TPO53
Task 3 Reading University Announces Energy-Saving Plan Out of concern for the environment, the university has announced an effort to reduce energy consumption.
The energy saving measures will start at the library. One measure involves the library's inside lighting: new overhead lights that use less power will be installed throughout the building. Another measure has to do with the temperature level in the library. The air-conditioning will be reduced on hot days, meaning that study areas will be kept somewhat warmer when it is hot outside.
Listening M: So what do you think of the new policy?
W: Well, they've got the right idea. But I don't think it will work out as they planned.
M: Really? Why not?
W: I just feel they haven't thought through the consequences. For example, have you seen the new lights?
They've already been installed in the reference room, they are just not bright enough.
M: Oh.
W: Yeah. And there are sorts of individual lamps in the study areas.
M: The reading lamps?
W: Yeah, the reading lamps. Well nobody uses them, nobody turns them on now. But people are gonna start turning them all on if the overhead light is dimmer. So any saving is gonna go away.
M: OK, but what about what they are doing with the air conditioning? That's surly going to save.
W: Save energy? You bet. But there is a different problem. Think about what the library's going to be like on hot days?
M: It's certainly gonna be a lot less comfortable.
W: Right now the library is the best place to get studying done. It' s pretty comfortable and it' s quiet. I think now when it is really hot, students will just wind up studying back to their dorm rooms. I know I will.
M: Cause the dorms will be still cool on hot days. But they are often so noisy.
W: Exactly, loud and busy and bad for my concentration.
M: So people won't have any really good place to study.
Task 4 Reading Chaining Behavior Many everyday human behaviors are made up of a sequence of several simpler behaviors.
In order to teach children to perform these complex behaviors, parents sometimes use a technique called chaining. First, parents identify each of the simpler component behaviors and determine the order in which these simpler behaviors are performed. Parents then start with the first task in the chain. When the child has mastered that element, parents then teach the second element together with the first and reinforce this effort. When these are performed satisfactorily, they move on to elements one, two, and three and so on, adding one behavior at a time. The behaviors are not taught in isolation; hence the term “chain.” Listening I have a three-year-old daughter, and last month I decided to help her learn how to wash her hands by herself. Now we usually think of washing our hands asone action, but when you think about it, you can break hand washing down into a series of simpler steps. Step 1, you turn on the water. Step 2, you get your hands wet. Step 3, you add some soap. Step 4, you rinse your hands and step 5 you turn off the water. So I broke it down into these steps and I help my daughter learn them one step at a time. I didn't present them all at once, because that would've been too complicated. First I showed her step 1, turning on the water, that's all we practiced for the next few days. Then when she started turning on the water by herself I added step 2, getting her hands wet. And for the next few days she practiced steps 1 and 2, turning on the water and getting her hands wet. Until she could do both steps on her own, then we added step 3, putting on the soap.
And she practiced steps 1, 2, and 3 for a while. Then we added step 4, rinsing her hands, and eventually step 5, turning off the water. She practiced all 5 steps in sequence for a few days until she could wash her hands all by herself.
Task 5 Listen to a conversation between two students.
W: Hi, Paul, how's it going?
M: Not great.
W: What's the matter?
M: I have a job interview tomorrow morning, and I just realized I forgot my suit at my parents' house. I forgot to bring it back with me after my last visit home. I have to wear a suit to the interview. It's expected.
W: What are you gonna do?
M: Well, my roommate said I could borrow his suit for the interview if I want to. It's a nice suit too.
W: But he is bigger than you. Does his suit fit?
M: I tried the trousers and suit coat on, they are kind of big on me, a little baggy. I mean, I don't look great in that suit, but I look okay I think. I could wear it.
W: But you might not make such great impression on the employer, wearing a suit that doesn't fit you very well.
M: And I do want them to hire me. It'll giveme the chance to work in a professional law office right out of college.
W: Well the stores will still be open for a couple of hours tonight, why don't you gobuy a new suit?
M: I could, it will be nice to have a new suit. Mine's pretty old.
W: So why don't you go for it?
M: Suits are expensive. And I have been saving to buy a bicycle for a long time. I am so sick of having to get everywhere on foot. I almost have enough money saved up. If I buy a suit, I'll have to wait a while to get the bike.
Task 6 Everyone knows food can become spoiled, go bad and become inedible. Usually the cause is harmful bacteria that grow naturally in food. So one of the best ways to prevent food from spoiling is to slow down bacteria growth. But how do you do that? Well, what influences how fast bacteria grow? Mainly it's temperature and moisture. So if you want to prevent food spoilage, you need to slow bacteria growth by controlling these factors. Why is controlling temperatureso important? Because the bacteria that cause food spoilage grow fast at warm temperatures, and more slowly at cooler temperatures. When your food is kept cool, it lasts longer right? For example, fresh fish left out in the sun on a warm day will spoil in a few hours, but if you freeze the fish, it will keep for months and months, right? That' s because low temperatures drastically slow down bacteria growth. Now I said that moisture is another factor you need to control, and every living thing needs moisture, and bacteria are no exception. Food that's high in water content provides the moisture that bacteria need to grow. Let's …uh let's compare two different kinds of milk, ok? Let's compare regular liquid milk with dry powdered milk. Regular milk spoils quickly right? But milk in powder form can be stored quite a long time, in fact, for years. Of course, bacteria are present in powdered milk too, but what's different between powdered and regular milk is the water content. Powdered milk has had the water, the moisture removed. And without moisture, bacteria can't grow. And this isn't truth just for milk, just about any fresh food will spoil more quickly than the dried food.
TPO54
Task 3 Reading Community Service Requirement A university education should encourage students to engage with the world around them, but I see less and less of that engagement on campus today. I propose, therefore, that the university make community service, such as working with the local children in town, a mandatory activity for all university students before they graduate. Creating a community service requirement is a good idea because it would strengthen the relationship between our school and the town. Additionally, in fulfilling the requirement, many students would discover a love of service that would inspire them to a lifetime of volunteer work in their future communities.
Sincerely, Sarah Brown Listening Woman: So what do you think about letter?
Man: Well, it might sound like a good idea, but I really don' t think it' s going to have any of the benefits that the letter writer says it will.
Woman: So you don't agree with it?
Man: No, if anything, it's going to hurt our relationship with our town, I mean forcing students to volunteer, it's gonna make them see it as a chore, a nuisance, and so they are not going to put their hearts into it, which is going to make the university look bad.
Woman: You are saying that students doing volunteer work in town will be unenthusiastic? And… Man: Right, it would be obvious they don't want to be there. That should not going to make things better, you know, in terms of how we are regarded by people in the local community.
Woman: But maybe students would learn to like it.
Man: I really doubt it. The whole idea that this is going to encourage students to do more volunteering in the future is just ridiculous. A lot of students are likely to come away from the experience with negative feelings about it.
Woman：Yeah, especially if their studies suffer from being forced to spend time away from them.
Man：All the students I know already complain about not having enough time as it is. So this extra work is going to be a bad experience, the hardly inspiration for them to pursue more volunteer work after they graduate.
Task 4 Reading Systems Thinking Companies have designed new and improved ways to solve problems within their organizations. Rather than seeking a simple cause and a direct solution to problems, companies are now using an approach called systems thinking. Systems thinking involves solving problems long-term by considering the "big picture," that is, how the interaction of many different parts of a large system may contribute to a problem.
Companies use systems thinking because, even though it may produce complex solutions that take a long time to implement, it is an effective way to solve problems and has a greater long-term benefit to the company.
Listening For example, I used to work for a corporation that was having problem with workers being absent a lot. To help address this problem, they hired a consultant who began by interviewing a lot of the workers, and getting to know more about them. She also researched other aspects of the company, such as the types of eating facilities and health services it offered. And what the consultant discovered was that many of the employees were missing work not for an obvious simple reason, like, say, lack of motivation, but because of health problems. Health problems that were the result of, or at least made worse by a combination of factors such as poor eating habits and lack of exercise. The consultant concluded that since the company didn't offer exercise opportunities or healthy meals, that this indirectly contributed to the workers' poor health.
The consultant proposed building a gym within the company office building for employees to use to exercise, and also to offer more nutritious menu in the cafeteria, which the company did, but it took a while. And after a year or so, after the company had time to construct a gym and revise its cafeteria menu, attendance began to improve and continued to improve until it was no longer a problem.
Task 6 Most animals, including humans follow biological cycles that are 24 hours long. Now what determines these 24-hour cycles? Do animals have something like a 24-hour clock inside them? Or are biological cycles determined by external factors, like the alternation of daylight and darkness. Well, research suggests that the answer is somewhere in between. Animals do have an internal clock, but external cues are important, too.
Take flying squirrels. Flying squirrels are nocturnal. They are active during the night and sleep during the day.
But in the experiment, some of these squirrels were kept in constant darkness. They were not exposed to any daylight for about a month, now do the squirrels continue to follow regular cycles of activity? Actually, they did. They continue to have regular patterns of sleeping and waking. This indicates that animals do having an internal clock which regulates their activity cycles. But…um, the internal clock is not precisely 24 hours long.
Instead of following 24-hour cycles, the squirrels followed cycles that were about half an hour shorter than that. So every day they woke up a little bit earlier. Without external cues, without sunlight to fine-tune their internal clocks, the squirrels' biological cycles drifted. So eh, what happened when the squirrels were exposed to daylight again? Well, after a month of darkness, a month of waking up half an hour earlier each day, the squirrels' activity cycle had shifted a lot. So, at first, their schedules didn't match up with the normal day. They weren' t active during the nighttime as flying squirrels usually are. Instead, they were waking up in the middle of the day. But after a while, the squirrel cycles began to change. Gradually, external cues, the cycle of light and darkness adjusted their internal clocks. So, eventually, um…they were brought back into a normal 24-hour schedule.
