READING
This section measures your ability to understand academic passages in English.
There are three passages in the section. Give yourself 18 minutes to read each passage and answer the questions about it. The entire section will take 54 minutes to complete. 
You may look back at a passage when answering the questions. You can skip questions and go back to them later as long as there is time remaining.
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set 
COLONIZING THE AMERICAS
It has long been accepted that the Americas were colonized by a migration of peoples from Asia slowly traveling across a land bridge called Beringia (now the Bering Strait between northeastern Asia and Alaska) during the last Ice Age. The land-travel theory about this migration was that around 11,000-12,000 years ago there was an ice-free corridor stretching from eastern Beringia to the areas of North America south of the great northern glaciers. It was this midcontinental corridor between two massive ice sheets-the Laurentide to the east and the Cordilleran to the west-that enabled the southward migration. But belief in this ice-free corridor began to crumble when paleoecologist Glen MacDonald demonstrated that some of the most important radiocarbon dates used to support the existence of an ice-free corridor were incorrect. He persuasively argued that such an ice-free corridor did not exist until much later, when the continental ice began its final retreat. 
Support is growing for the alternative theory that people using watercraft, possibly skin boats, moved southward from Beringia along the Gulf of Alaska and then southward along the Northwest Coast of North America possibly as early as 16,000 years ago. This route would have enabled humans to enter southern areas of the Americas prior to the melting of • 'l'!' ).,.,.. . Reading the continental glaciers. Until the early 1970s, most archaeologists did not consider the coast a possible migration route into the Americas because geologists originally believed that during the last Ice Age the entire Northwest Coast was covered by glacial ice. It had been assumed that the ice extended westward from the Alaskan/Canadian mountains to the very edge of the continental shelf-the flat, submerged part of the continent that extends into the ocean. This would have created a barrier of ice extending from the Alaska Peninsula, through the Gulf of Alaska and southward along the Northwest Coast of North America to what is today the state of Washington. 
The most influential proponent of the coastal migration route has been Canadian archaeologist Knut Fladmark. He theorized that with the use of watercraft, people gradually colonized unglaciated refuges and areas along the continental shelf exposed by the lower sea level. Fladmark's hypothesis received additional support from the fact that the greatest diversity in Native American languages occurs along the west coast of the Americas, suggesting that this region has been settled the longest. 
More recent geologic studies documented deglaciation and the existence of ice-free areas throughout major coastal areas of British Columbia, Canada, by 13,000 years ago. Research now indicates that sizable areas of southeastern Alaska along the inner continental shelf were not covered by ice toward the end of the last Ice Age. One study suggests that except for a 250-mile coastal area between southwestern British Columbia and Washington State, the Northwest Coast of North America was largely free of ice by approximately 16,000 years ago. Vast areas along the coast may have been deglaciated beginning around 16,000 years ago, possibly providing a coastal corridor for the movement of plants, animals, and humans sometime between 13,000 and 14,000 years ago. 
The coastal hypothesis has gained increasing support in recent years because the remains of large land animals, such as caribou and brown bears, have been found in southeastern Alaska dating between 10,000 and 12,500 years ago. This is the time period in which most scientists formerly believed the area to be inhospitable for humans. It has been suggested that if the environment were capable of supporting breeding populations of bears, there would have been enough food resources to support humans. Fladmark and others believe that the first human colonization of America occurred by boat along the Northwest Coast during the very late Ice Age, possibly as early as 14,000 years ago. The most recent geologic evidence indicates that it may have been possible for people to colonize ice-free regions along the continental shelf that were still exposed by the lower sea level between 13,000 and 14,000 years ago. 
The coastal hypothesis suggests an economy based on marine mammal hunting, saltwater fishing, shellfish gathering, and the use of watercraft. Because of the barrier of ice to the east, the Pacific Ocean to the west, and populated areas to the north, there may have been a greater impetus for people to move in a southerly direction. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
It has long been accepted that the Americas were colonized by a migration of peoples from Asia, slowly traveling across a land bridge called Beringia (now the Bering Strait between northeastern Asia and Alaska) during the last Ice Age. The land-travel theory about this migration was that around 11,000-12,000 years ago there was an ice-free corridor stretching from eastern Beringia to the areas of North America south of the great northern glaciers. It was this midcontinental corridor between two massive ice sheets-the Laurentide to the east and the Cordilleran to the west-that enabled the southward migration. But belief in this ice-free corridor began to crumble when paleoecologist Glen MacDonald demonstrated that some of the most important radiocarbon dates used to support the existence of an ice-free corridor were incorrect. He persuasively argued that such an ice-free corridor did not exist until much later, when the continental ice began its final retreat. 
1. The word "persuasively" in the passage is closest in meaning to A. aggressively B. inflexibly C. convincingly D. carefully Support is growing for the alternative theory that people using watercraft, possibly skin boats, moved southward from Beringia along the Gulf of Alaska and then southward along the Northwest Coast of North America possibly as early as 16,000 years ago. This route would have enabled humans to enter southern areas of the Americas prior to the melting of the continental glaciers. Until the early 1970s, most archaeologists did not consider the coast a possible migration route into the Americas because geologists originally believed that during the last Ice Age the entire Northwest Coast was covered by glacial ice. It had been assumed that the ice extended westward from the Alaskan/Canadian mountains to the very edge of the continental shelf-the flat, submerged part of the continent that extends into the ocean. This would have created a barrier of ice extending from the Alaska Peninsula, through the Gulf of Alaska and southward along the Northwest Coast of North America to what is today the state of Washington. 
2. Paragraph 2 supports the idea that, before the 1970s, most archaeologists held which of the following views about the earliest people to reach the Americas? 
A. They could not have sailed directly from Beringia to Alaska and then southward because, it was thought, glacial ice covered the entire coastal region. 
B. They were not aware that the climate would continue to become milder. 
C. They would have had no interest in migrating southward from Beringia until after the continental glaciers had begun to melt. 
D. They lacked the navigational skills and appropriate boats needed for long-distance trips. 
The most influenti al proponent of the coastal migration route has been Canadian archaeologist Knut Fladmark. He theorized that with the use of watercraft, people gradually colonized unglaciated refuges and areas along the continent al shelf exposed by the lower sea level. Fladmark's hypothesis received additional support from the fact that the greatest diversity in Native American languages occurs along the west coast of the Americas, suggesting that this region has been settled the longest. 
3. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A. Because this region has been settled the longest, it also displays the greatest diversity in Native American languages. 
B. Fladmark's hypothesis states that the west coast of the Americas has been settled longer than any other region. 
C. The fact that the greatest diversity of Native American languages occurs along the west coast of the Americas lends strength to Fladmark's hypothesis. 
D. According to Flad mark, Native American languages have survived the longest along the west coast of the Americas. 
More recent geologic studies documented deglaciation and the existence of ice-free areas throughout the major coastal areas of British Columbi a, Canada, by 13,000 years ago. Research now indicates that sizable areas of southeastern Alaska along the inner continent al shelf were not covered by ice toward the end of the last Ice Age. One study suggests that except for a 250-mile coastal area between southwestern British Columbia and Washington State, the Northwest Coast of North America was largely free of ice by approxim ately 16,000 years ago. Vast areas along the coast may have been deglaciated beginning around 16,000 years ago, possibly providing a coastal corridor for the movement of plants, animals, and humans sometime between 13,000 and 14,000 years ago. 
4. The author's purpose in paragraph 4 is to 
A. indicate that a number of recent geologic studies seem to provide support for the coastal hypothesis 
B. indicate that coastal and inland migrations may have happened simultaneously 
C. explain why humans may have reached America's northwest coast before animals and plants did 
D. show that the coastal hypothesis may explain how people first reached Alaska but it cannot explain how people reached areas like modern British Columbia a nd Washington State 
The coastal hypothesis has gained increasing support in recent years because the remains of large land animals, such as caribou and brown bears, have been found in southeastern Alaska dating between 10,000 and 12,500 years ago. This is the time period in which most scientists formerly believed the area to be inhospitable for humans. It has been suggested that if the environment were capable of supporting breeding populations of bears, there would have been enough food resources to support humans. Fladmark and others believe that the first human colonization of America occurred by boat along the Northwest Coast during the very late Ice Age, possibly as early as 14,000 years ago. The most recent geologic evidence indicates that it may have been possible for people to colonize ice-free regions along the continental shelf that were still exposed by the lower sea level between 13,000 and 14,000 years ago. 
5. According to paragraph 5, the discovery of the remains of large land animals supports the coastal hypothesis by providing evidence that 
A. humans were changing their hunting techniques to adapt to coastal rather than inland environments 
B. animals had migrated from the inland to the coasts, an indication that a midcontinental ice-free corridor was actually implausible 
C. humans probably would have been able to find enough resources along the coastal corridor 
D. the continental shelf was still exposed by lower sea levels during the period when the southward migration of people began 
6. The word "inhospitable" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. not familiar 
B. not suitable 
C. not dangero us 
D. not reachable 
7. According to paragraph 5, the most recent geologic research provides support for a first colonization of America dating as far back as 
A. 16,000 years ago 
B. 14,000 years ago 
C. 12,500 years ago 
D. 10,000 years ago 
The coastal hypothesis suggests an economy based on marine mammal hunting, saltwater : fishing, shellfish gathering, and the use of watercraf t. Because of the barrier of ice to the east, : the Pacific Ocean to the west, and populated areas to the north, there may have been agreater A , impetus for people to move in a southerly direction. 
8. The word "impetus" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. chance 
B. protection 
C. possibility 
D. incentive 
It has long been accepted that the Americas were colonized by a migration of peoples from Asia slowly traveling across a land bridge called Beringia (now the Bering Strait between northea stern Asia and Alaska) during the last Ice Age. (A) The land-travel theory about this migration was that around 11,000-12,000 years ago there was an ice-free corridor stretching from eastern Beringia to the areas of North America south of the great northern glaciers. It was this midcontinental corridor between two massive ice sheets-the Laurentide to the east and the Cordilleran to the west-that enabled the southward migration. (B) But belief in this ice-free corridor began to crumble when paleoecologist Glen MacDonald demonstrated that some of the most important radiocarbon dates used to support the existence of an ice-free corridor were incorrect (C) He persuasively argued that such an ice-free corridor did not exist until much later, when the continental ice began its final retreat .. (0) 
9. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A}, (B), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
Moreover, other evidence suggests that even if an ice-free corridor did exist, it would have lacked the resources needed for human migration. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C 
D. Choice D 
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. 
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
Recent evidence favors a rival to the long-standing theory that the Americas were colonized 11,000-12,000 years ago by people migrating south from Beringia along a midcontinental ice-free corridor. 
Answer Choices 
[A] Evidence that an ice-free corridor between two ice sheets developed when the continental ice first began to melt came primarily from radiocarbon dating. 
[B] There is growing support for the theory that migration took place much earlier, by sea, following a coastal route along Alaska and down the northwest coast. 
[C] Recent geologic evidence indicates that contrary to what had been believed, substantia l areas along the coast were free of ice as early as 16,000 years ago. 
[D] Research now indicates that the parts of the inner continental shelf that remained covered with ice were colonized by a variety of early human groups well adapted to living in extremely cold environments. 
[E] There is evidence suggesting that areas along the coast may have contained enough food resources between 13,000 and 14,000 years ago to have made human colonization possible. 
[F] Even though the northern part of the continent allowed for a more varied economy, several early human groups quickly moved south. 

Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to comple te this practice set. 
REFLE CTION IN TEACHING
Teachers, it is thought, benefit from the practice of reflection, the conscious act of thinking deeply about and carefully examining the interactions and events within their own classrooms. Educators T. Wildman and J. Niles (1987) describe a scheme for developing reflective practice in experience d teachers. This was justified by the view that reflective practice could help teachers to feel more intellectua lly involved in their role and work in teaching and enable them to cope with the paucity of scientific fact and the uncertainty of knowledge in the discipline of teaching. 
Wildman and Niles were particularly intereste d in investigating the conditions under which reflection might flourish-a subject on which there is little guidance in the literature. They designed an experimental strategy for a group of teachers in Virginia and worked with 40 practicing teachers over several years. They were concerne d that many would be "drawn to these new, refreshing conceptions of teaching only to find that the void between the abstractions and the realities of teacher reflection is too great to bridge. Reflection on a complex task such as teaching is not easy." The teachers were taken through a program of talking about teaching events, moving on to reflecting about specific issues in a supporte d, and later an independent, manner. 
Wildman and Niles observed that systematic reflection on teaching required a sound ability to understand classroom events in an objective manner. They describe the initial understanding in the teachers with whom they were working as being "utilitarian ... and not rich or detailed enough to drive systematic reflection." Teachers rarely have the time or opportunities to view their own or the teaching of others in an objective manner. Further observation revealed the tendency of teachers to evaluate events rather than review the contributory factors in a considered manner by, in effect, standing outside the situation. 
Helping this group of teachers to revise their thinking about classroom events became central. This process took time and patience and effective trainers. The researchers estimate that the initial training of the teachers to view events objectively took between 20 and 30 hours, with the same number of hours again being required to practice the skills of reflection. 
Wildman and Niles identify three principles that facilitate reflective practice in a teaching situation. The first is support from administrators in an education system, enabling teachers to understand the requirements of reflective practice and how it relates to teaching students. The second is the availability of sufficient time and space. The teachers in the program described how they found it difficult to put aside the immediate demands of others in order to give themselves the time they needed to develop their reflective skills. The third is the developme nt of a collaborative environment with support from other teachers. Support and encoura gement were also required to help teachers in the program cope with aspects of their professional life with which they were not comfortable. Wildman and Niles make a summary comment: "Perhaps the most important thing we learned is the idea of the teacher-as-reflectiv e-practitioner will not happen simply because it is a good or even compelling idea." 
The work of Wildman and Niles suggests the importance of recognizing some of the difficulties of instituting reflective practice. Others have noted this, making a similar point about the teaching profession's cultural inhibitions about reflective practice. Zeichner and Liston (1987) point out the inconsistency between the role of the teacher as a (reflective) profession al 2 decision maker and the more usual role of the teacher as a technician, putting into practice the ideas of others. More basic than the cultural issues is the matter of motivation. Becoming a reflective practitioner requires extra work (Jaworski, 1993) and has only vaguely defined goals with, perhaps, little initially perceivable reward and the threat of vulnerability. Few have directly questioned what might lead a teacher to want to become reflective. Apparently, the most obvious reason for teachers to work toward reflective practice is that teacher educators think it is a good thing. There appear to be many unexplored matters about the motivation to reflect-for example, the value of externally motivated reflection as opposed to that of teachers who might reflect by habit. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
Teachers, it is thought, benefit from the practice of reflection, the conscious act of thinking deeply about and carefully examining the interactions and events within their own classrooms. 
Educators T. Wildman and J. Niles (1987) describe a scheme for developing reflective practice in experienced teachers. This was justified by the view that reflective practice could help teachers to feel more intellectually involved in their role and work in teaching and enable them to cope with the paucity of scientific fact and the uncertainty of knowledge in the discipline of teaching. 
11. The word "justified" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. supported 
B. shaped 
C. stimulated 
D. suggested 
12. According to paragraph 1, it was believed that reflection could help teachers 
A. understand intellectual principles of teaching 
B. strengthen their intellectual connection to their work 
C. use scientific fact to improve discipline and teaching 
D. adopt a more disciplined approach to teaching 
Wildman and Niles were particularly interested in investig ating the conditions under which reflection might flourish-a subject on which there is little guidance in the literature. They designed an experimental strategy for a group of teachers in Virginia and worked with 40 practicing teachers over several years. They were concerned that many would be "drawn to these new, refreshing conceptions of teaching only to find that the void between the abstractions and the realities of teacher reflection is too great to bridge. Reflection on a complex task such as teaching is not easy." The teachers were taken through a program of talking about teaching events, moving on to reflecting about specific issues in a supported, and later an independent, manner. 
13. All of the following are mentioned about the experimental strategy described in paragraph 2 EXCEPT: 
A. It was designed so that teachers would eventually reflect without help from others. 
B. It was used by a group of teachers over a period of years. 
C. It involved having teachers take part in discussions of classroom events. 
D. It involved having teachers record in writing their reflections about teaching. 
14. According to paragraph 2, Wildman and Niles worried that the teachers they were working with might feel that 
A. the number of teachers involved in their program was too large 
B. the concepts of teacher reflection were so abstract that they could not be applied 
C. the ideas involved in reflection were act ually not new and refreshing 
D. several years would be needed to acquire the habit of reflecting on their teaching 
Wildman and Niles observed that systematic reflection on teaching required a sound ability to understand classroom events in an objective manner. They describe the initial understanding in the teachers with whom they were working as being "utilitarian ... and not rich or detailed enough to drive systematic reflection."Teachers rarely have the time or opportunities to view their own or the teaching of others in an objective manner. Further observation revealed the tendency of teachers to evaluate events rather than review the contributory factors in a considered manner by, in effect, standing outside the situation. 
15. The word "objective" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. unbiased 
B. positive 
C. systematic 
D. thorough 
16. According to paragraph 3, what did the teachers working with Wildman and Niles often fail to do when they attempted to practice reflection? 
A. Correctly calculate the amount of time needed for reflection 
B. Provide sufficiently detailed descriptions of the methods they used to help them reflect 
C. Examine thoughtfully the possible causes of events in their classrooms 
D. Establish realistic goals for themselves in practicing reflection
Helping this group of teachers to revise their thinking about classroom events became central. This process took time and patience and effective trainers. The researchers estimate that the initial training of the teachers to view events objectively took between 20 and 30 hours, with the same number of hours again being required to practice the skills of reflection. 
17. How is paragraph 4 related to other aspects of the discussion of reflection in the passage ? 
A. It describes and comments on steps taken to overcome problems identified earlier in the passage. 
B. It challenges the earlier claim that teachers rarely have the time to think about their own or others' teaching. 
C. It identifies advantages gained by teachers who followed the training program described earlier in the passage. 
D. It explains the process used to define the principles discussed later in the passage. 
The work of Wildman and Niles suggests the importance of recognizing some of the difficulties of instituting reflective practice. Others have noted this, making a similar point about the teaching profession's cultural inhibitions about reflective practice. Zeichner and Liston (1987) point out the inconsistency between the role of the teacher as a (reflective) professional decision maker and the more usual role of the teacher as a technician, putting into practice the ideas of others. More basic than the cultural issues is the matter of motivation. Becoming a reflective practitioner requires extra work (Jaworski, 1993) and has only vaguely defined goals with, perhaps, little initially perceivable reward and the threat of vulnerability. Few have directly questioned what might lead a teacher to want to become reflective. Apparently, the most obvious reason for teachers to work toward reflective practice is that teacher educators think it is a good thing. There appear to be many unexplored matters about the motivation to reflect-for example, the value of externally motivated reflection as opposed to that of teachers who might reflect by habit. 
18. According to paragraph 6, teachers may be discouraged from reflecting because 
A. it is not generally supported by teacher educators 
B. the benefits of reflection may not be apparent immediately 
C. it is impossible to teach and reflect on one's teaching at the same time 
D. they have often failed in their attempts to become reflective practitioners 
Helping this group of teachers to revise their thinking about classroom events became central. (A) This process took time and patience and effective trainers. (B) The researchers estimate that the initial training of the teachers to view events objectively took between 20 and 30 hours, with the same number of hours again being required to practice the skills of reflection. 
(C) Wildman and Niles identify three principles that facilitate reflective practice in a teaching situation. (D) The first is support from administrators in an education system, enabling teachers to understand the requirements of reflective practice and how it relates to teaching students. 
The second is the availability of sufficient time and space. The teachers in the program described how they found it difficult to put aside the immediate demands of others in order to give themselves the time they needed to develop their reflective skills. The third is the development of a collaborative environment with support from other teachers. Support and encouragement were also required to help teachers in the program cope with aspects of their professional life with which they were not comfortable. Wildman and Niles make a summary comment: "Perhaps the most important thing we learned is the idea of the teacher-as-reflectiv e-practitioner will not happen simply because it is a good or even compelling idea." 
19. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (8), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
However, cha nging teachers' thinking about reflection will not succeed unless there is support for reflection in the teaching environment. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B
C. Choice C
D. Choice D 
20. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
Wildman and Niles have conducted research on reflection in teaching . 
Answer Choices 
[A] Through their work with Virginia teachers, Wildman and Niles proved conclusively that reflection, though difficult, benefits both teachers and students. 
[B] Wildman and Niles found that considerable training and practice are required to understand classroom events and develop the skills involved in reflection. 
[C] Wildman and Niles identified three principles that teachers can use to help themselves cope with problems that may arise as a result of reflection. 
[D] Wildman and Niles concluded that teachers need sufficient resources as well as the cooperation and encouragement of others to practice reflection. 
[E] There are numerous obstacles to implementing reflection in schools and insufficient understanding of why teachers might want to reflect. 
[F] Whether teachers can overcome the difficulties involved in reflection may depend on the nature and intensity of their motivation to reflect. . "' Reading Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
THE ARRIV AL OF PLANT LIFE IN HAWAII 
When the Hawaiian Islands emerged from the sea as volcanoes, starting about five million years ago, they were far removed from other landmasses. Then, as blazing sunshine alternated with drenching rains, the harsh, barren surfaces of the black rocks slowly began to soften. Winds brought a variety of life-forms. 
Spores light enough to float on the breezes were carried thousands of miles from more ancient lands and deposited at random across the bare mountain flanks. A few of these spores found a toehold on the dark, forbidding rocks and grew and began to work their transformation upon the land. Lichens were probably the first successful flora. These are not single individual plants; each one is a symbiotic combination of an alga and a fungus. The algae capture the Sun's energy by photosynthesis and store it in organic molecules. The fungi absorb moisture and mineral salts from the rocks, passing these on in waste products that nourish algae. It is significant that the earliest living things that built communities on these islands are examples of symbiosis, a phenomenon that depends upon the close cooperation of two or more forms of life and a principle that is very important in island communities. 
Lichens helped to speed the decomposition of the hard rock surfaces, preparing a soft bed of soil that was abundant ly supplied with minerals that had been carried in the molten rock from the bowels of Earth. Now, other forms of life could take hold: ferns and mosses (two of the most ancient types of land plants) that flourish even in rock crevices. These plants propagate by producing spores-tiny fertilized cells that contain all the instructions for making a new plant-but the spores are unprotected by any outer coating and carry no supply of nutrient Vast numbers of them fall on the ground beneath the mother plants. Sometimes they are carried farther afield by water or by wind. But only those few spores that settle down in very favorable locations can start new life; the vast majority fall on barren ground. By force of sheer numbers, however, the mosses and ferns reached Hawaii, survived, and multiplied. Some species developed great size, becoming tree ferns that even now grow in the Hawaiian forests. 
Many millions of years after ferns evolved (but long before the Hawaiian Islands were born from the sea), another kind of flora evolved on Earth: the seed-bearing plants. This was a wonderful biologica l invention. The seed has an outer coating that surrounds the genetic material of the new plant, and inside this covering is a concentrated supply of nutrients. Thus, the seed's chances of survival are greatly enhanced over those of the naked spore. One type of seed-bearing plant, the angiosperm, includes all forms of blooming vegetation. In the angiosperm the seeds are wrapped in an additional layer of covering. Some of these coats are hard-like the shell of a nut-for extra protection. Some are soft and tempting, like a peach or a cherry. In some angiosperms the seeds are equipped with gossamer wings, like the dandelion and milkweed seeds. These new characteristics offered better ways for the seeds to move to new habitats. They could travel through the air, float in water, and lie dormant for many months. 
Plants with large, buoyant seeds- like coconuts-drift on ocean currents and are washed up on the shores. Remarkably resistant to the vicissitudes of ocean travel, they can survive prolonged immersion in saltwater. When they come to rest on warm beaches and the conditions are favorable, the seed coats soften. Nourished by their imported supply of nutrients, the young plants push out their roots and establish their place in the sun.
By means of these seeds, plants spread more widely to new locations, even to isolated islands like the Hawaiian archipelago, which lies more than 2,000 miles west of California and 3,500 miles east of Japan. The seeds of grasses, flowers, and blooming trees made the long trips to these islands. (Grasses are simple forms of angiosperms that bear their encapsulated seeds on long stalks.) In a surprisingly short time, angiosperms filled many of the land areas on Hawaii that had been bare. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
Spores light enough to float on the breezes were carried thousands of miles from more ancient lands and deposited at random across the bare mountain flanks. A few of these spores found a toehold on the dark, forbiddin g rocks and grew and began to work their transformation upon the land. Lichens were probably the first successful flora. These are not single individual plants; each one is a symbiotic combination of an alga and a fungus. The algae capture the Sun's energy by photosynt hesis and store it in organic molecules. The fungi absorb moisture and mineral salts from the rocks, passing these on in waste products that nourish algae. It is significant that the earliest living things that built communit ies on these islands are examples of symbiosis, a phenomenon that depends upon the close cooperation of two or more forms of life and a principle that is very important in island communities. 
21. The phrase "at random" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. finally 
B. over a long period oftime 
C. successfully 
D. without a definite pattern 
22. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A. Some of the earliest important examples of symbiosis-the close cooperation of two or more living things-occur in island communities. 
B. Symbiosi.s-the close cooperation of pairs or small groups of living organisms-is especially important in these island environmen ts. 
C. The first organisms on these islands worked together closely in a relationship known as symbiosis, which is particularly important on islands. 
D. It is significant to note that organisms in the beginning stages of the development of island life cannot survive without close cooperation. 
23. It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that the fungi in lichens benefit from their symbiot ic relationship with algae in what way? 
A. The algae help the fungi meet some of their energy needs. 
B. The algae protect the fungi from the Sun's radiation. 
C. The algae provide the fungi with greater space for absorbing water. 
D. The fungi produce less waste in the presence of algae. 
Lichens helped to speed the decomposition of the hard rock surfaces, preparing a soft bed of soil that was abundan tly supplied with minerals that had been carried in the molten rock from the bowels of Earth. Now, other forms of life could take hold: ferns and mosses (two of the most ancient types of land plants) that flourish even in rock crevices. These plants propagate by producing spores-tiny fertilized cells that contain all the instructions for making a new plant-but the spores are unprotected by any outer coating and carry no supply of nutrient. Vast numbers of them fall on the ground beneath the mother plants. Sometimes they are carried farther afield by water or by wind. But only those few spores that settle down in very favorable locations can start new life; the vast majority fall on barren ground. By force of sheer numbers, however, the mosses and ferns reached Hawaii, survived, and multiplied. Some species developed great size, becoming tree ferns that even now grow in the Hawaiian forests. 
24. According to paragraph 3, what was the relationship between lichens and ferns in the development of plant life on Hawaii? 
A. Ferns were able to grow because lichens created suitable soil. 
B. The decomposition of ferns produced minerals that were used by lichens. 
C. Lichens and ferns competed to grow in the same rocky environments. 
D. Lichens and ferns were typically found together in volcanic areas. 
Many millions of years after ferns evolved (but long before the Hawaiian Islands were born from the sea), another kind of flora evolved on Earth: the seed-bearing plants. This was a wonderful biological invention. The seed has an outer coating that surrounds the genetic material of the new plant, and inside this covering is a concentrated supply of nutrients. Thus, the seed's chances of survival are greatly enhanced over those of the naked spore. One type of seed-bearing plant, the angiosperm, includes all forms of blooming vegetation. In the angiosperm the seeds are wrapped in an additional layer of covering. Some of these coats are hard-like the shell of a nut-for extra protection. Some are soft and tempting, like a peach or a cherry. In some angiosperms the seeds are equipped with gossamer wings, like the dandelion and milkweed seeds. These new characteristics offered better ways for the seeds to move to new habitats. They could travel through the air, float in water, and lie dormant for many months. 
25. Why does the author mention "a nut," "a peach," and "a cherry"? 
A. To indicate that some seeds are less likely to survive than others 
B. To point out that many angiosperms can be eaten 
C. To provide examples of blooming plants 
D. To illustrate the variety of coverings among angiosperm seeds
26. The word "dormant" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. hidden 
B. inactive 
C. underground 
D. preserved 
27. According to paragraph 4, why do seeds have a greater chance of survival than spores do? To receive credit, you must select TWO answer choices. 
[A] Seeds need less water to grow into a mature plant than spores do. 
[B] Seeds do not need to rely on outside sources of nutrients. 
[C] Seeds are better protected from environmental dangers than spores are. 
[D] Seeds are heavier than spores and are therefore more likely to take root and grow. 
Plants with large, buoyant seeds-like coconuts-drift on ocean currents and are washed up on the shores. Remarkably resistant to the vicissitudes of ocean travel, they can survive prolonged immersion in saltwater. When they come to rest on warm beaches and the conditions are favorable, the seed coats soften. Nourished by their imported supply of nutrients, the young plants push out their roots and establish their place in the sun. 
28. According to paragraph 5, a major reason that coconuts can establish themselves in distant locations is that their seeds can 
A. survive long exposure to heat on island beaches 
B. float and survive for long periods in ocean water
C. use saltwater for maintenance and growth
D. maintain hard, protective coats even after growing roots 
Lichens helped to speed the decompo sition of the hard rock surfaces, preparing a soft bed of soil that was abundantly supplied with minerals that had been carried in the molten rock from the bowels of Earth. Now, other forms of life could take hold: ferns and mosses (two of the most ancient types of land plants) that flourish even in rock crevices. (A) These plants propagate by producing spores-tiny fertilized cells that contain all the instructions for making a new plant-but the spores are unprotected by any outer coating and carry no supply of nutrient. 
(B) Vast numbers of them fall on the ground beneath the mother plants. (C) Sometimes they are carried farther afield by water or by wind. (D) But only those few spores that settle down in very favorable locations can start new life; the vast majority fall on barren ground. By force of sheer numbers, however, the mosses and ferns reached Hawaii, survived, and multiplied. Some species developed great size, becoming tree ferns that even now grow in the Hawaiian forests.
29. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters {A), {B), {C), and (0) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
So since the chances of survival for any individual spore are small, the plants have to produce many spores in order to reproduce. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C
D. Choice D 
30. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
After the formation of the Hawaiian Islands, much time passed before conditions were suitable for plant life . 
Answer Choices 
[A] Algae are classified as symbiotic because they produce energy through the process of photosynt hesis. 
[B] The first successful plants on Hawaii were probably lichens, which consist of algae and fungi living in a symbiotic relationship. 
[C] Lichens helped create favorable conditions for the growth of spore-producing plants such as ferns and mosses. 
[D] Seed-beari ng plants evolved much later than spore-producing plants, but both types of plants had evolved well before the formation of the Hawaiian islands. 
[E] Unlike spores, seeds must move to new habitats in order to have a strong chance of survival and growth. 
[F] Seed-beari ng plants arrived and spread quickly in Hawaii, thanks to characteristics that increased their seeds' ability to survive and to move to different areas. 
LISTENING
This section measures your ability to understand conversa tions and lectures in English. 
Listen to each conversa tion and lecture only one time. After each conversa tion and lecture, you will answer some questions about it. Answer each question based on what is stated or implied by the speakers. 
You may take notes while you listen and use your notes to help you answer the questions. Your notes will not be scored. 
Answer each question before moving on. Do not return to previous questions. 
It will take about 41 minutes to listen to the conversa tions and lectures and answer the questions about them.
Directions: Listen to Track 1. 0 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
1. Why does the woman go to see the professor? 
A. To get advice on the topic of a term paper 
B. To discuss different types of food packaging 
C. To find out if the university will offer courses in food packaging 
D. To ask about jobs in the food industry 2
2. Why does the professor mention his previous jobs? 
A. To explain why the woman should study physics, math, and chemistry 
B. To recommend that the woman get a summer job on a fishing boat 
C. To point out that industry jobs can lead to a teaching career 
D. To confirm an assumption the woman made about finding a job 
3. The woman mentions a research study of milk packaging. What was the finding of the study? 
A.  Plastic containers may change the flavor of milk. 
B.  Light may negatively affect the quality of milk. 
C.  People prefer to buy milk in see-through containers. 
D.  Opaque containers are effective in protecting milk from bacteria. 
4. What does the professor imply about the dairy in Chelsea? 
A.  It has plans to start bottling milk in opaque containers. 
B.  Some of its employees attended the university. 
C.  Employees there might be able to provide useful information. 
D.  He worked there before joining the university faculty. 
5. Listen to Track 2. 0 
A.  She has read conflicting information. 
B.  She has been too busy to begin her research. 
C.  The topic she is researching is too broad. 
D.  The information she needs is not available.
Directions: Listen to Track 3. 0 
Environmental Science 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
6. What is the lecture mainly about? 
A. Factors involved in the increased growth of shrubs in Arctic Alaska 
B. How temperature increases might be affecting the permafrost in Arctic Alaska 
C. Why nutrient production of microbes in the soil in Arctic Alaska is declining 
D. Reasons that grasslands are turning into tundra in Arctic Alaska 
7. According to the professor, what are two features of shrubs that allow them to grow well in Arctic regions? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] They have roots that can penetrate permafrost. 
[B] Their height allows them to absorb more sunlight. 
[C] They absorb nutrients from the soil efficiently. 
[D] They have a shallow root system. 
8. What is one reason for the increase in shrub growth in Arctic Alaska? 
A.  Decreases in grass and moss growth have altered the balance of nutrients in the soil. 
B.  Increases in ground temperature have led to increased microbial activity. 
C.  Increases in average winter temperatures have made permafrost permeable to water. 
D.  Increases in snowfall have provided more water for shrubs. 
9. Why are nutrients in the soil NOT carried away by spring runoff? 
A.  The roots of shrubs prevent nutrient-filled soil from being washed away. 
B.  Most nutrients are not in the area of the soil most affected by runoff. 
C.  Most nutrients remain frozen in the permafrost when spring runoff is at its peak. 
D.  Most nutrients have been absorbed by vegetation before the runoff period begins. 
10. Why does the professor mention shrub expansion into other environments, such as semiarid grasslands? 
A. To suggest that new shrubland may not convert back to tundra 
B. To explain how shrubland can expand in a warm climate 
C. To cite a similarity between the types of shrubs in semiarid grassland and tundra environments 
D. To explain how a biological loop can cause shrub expansion 
11. Listen to Track 4. 0 
A. The information she gave is important enough to be repeated. 
B. Climate scientists are asking the wrong questions. 
C. The phenomenon she is describing is more complex than it appears. 
D. Students should be able to solve the puzzle easily. 
Directions: Listen to Track 5. 0 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
12. What are the speakers mainly discussing? 
A. A book that the man is trying to find in the library 
B. A book that the man already returned to the library 
C. A book that the man is using to write his senior thesis 
D. A book that the man lent to his sociology professor 
13. What does the woman offer to do for the man? 
A. Let the man know when a book he needs is returned to the library
B. Photocopy a chapter of a book for him 
C. Ask a professor to return a book the man needs 
D. Find a copy of a book for him at another library 
14. What is the woman trying to explain when she mentions students who have lost their borrowing privileges? 
A. Why the man should not photocopy part of the book 
B. The reasons for one of the library's policies 
C. What will happen if the man does not return the book 
D. The reason the man has to fill out a form 
15. How does the man probably feel at the end of the conversation? 
A. Annoyed that he has to pay a fine on the book 
B. Upset that he will lose his library privileges 
C. Glad that he can keep the book for two more weeks 
D. Appreciative that the woman is helping him 
16.Listen to Track 6. 0
A. To make sure she understands what the man's problem is 
B. To encourage the man to return the book to the library soon 
C. To check whether the man has already returned the book 
D. To explain to the man a change in the library's policies 
Directions: Listen to Track 7. 0 
Now answer the questions. 
17. What is the lecture mainly about? 
A. Reasons that geologists study lake fossils in desert regions 
B. A comparison of ancient and present-day lakes in desert environments 
C. Geological evidence for the formation of ancient sand dunes 
D. A hypothesis for how some ancient desert lakes formed 
18. What is the professor's opinion about the conclusions of the recent study of the limestone formations in the Empty Quarter? 
A. They have changed the way geologists study desert environments. 
B. They contradict findings about similar desert lakes. 
C. They explain the causes of monsoons in the desert. 
D. They need to be confirmed by additional studies. 
19. According to the professor, what feature of the sand dunes made the formation of the lakes possible? 
A. The degree of slope of the sides of the dunes 
B. The presence of clay and silt particles in the dunes 
C. The position of the dunes relative to the wind and rain 
D. The narrowness of the valleys between the dunes 
20. How is it possible to determine in which rainy period a lake was formed? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] By examining the location of the lake bed 
[B] By measuring the amount of sand covering the lake bed 
[C] By examining the color of the limestone formation 
[D] By identifying the types of fossils found in the limestone 
21. What does the professor imply about the lack of water buffalo and hippopotamus fossils in the more recent lakes? 
A. The level of water in the lakes was not sufficient for these animals. 
B. The bottoms of the lakes were too sandy for these animals to stand in. 
C. The location of the lakes made them too difficult for these animals to reach. 
D. The vegetation near the lakes did not attract these animals. 
22. What possible explanation does the professor give for the apparent absence of fish in the most ancient lakes? 
A. The presence of predators 
B. Lack of appropriate food 
C. Lack of suitable water 
D. Extreme desert temperatures 
Directions: Listen to Track 8. 0
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
23. What does the professor mainly discuss? 
A. The findings of a study on prairie dog communication 
B. The way that mammals learn to make warning cries 
C. Features that distinguish language from animal communication systems 
D. Various types of signals used by animals to communicate with each other 
24. Why does the student mention a research project she studied in a biology class? 
A. To point out similarities in the behavior of rodents and monkeys 
B. To explain how she first became interested in animal communication 
C. To introduce an instance of an animal species that might have language 
D. To show how she applied her knowledge of linguistics in another course 
25. What is the professor's opinion of a recent study of prairie dogs? 
A. She finds the study interesting but is not convinced that prairie dogs can communic ate. 
B. She thinks that some claims made by the researchers are not supported by their findings. 
C. She sees the study as proof that mammals other than humans possess a form of language. 
D. She thinks the researchers misinterpreted the high-pitched barks as warning signals. 
26. What does the professor say about the individual units that make up human languages? 
A.  They can be combined to create an infinite number of new messages. 
B.  They are not capable of being reproduced by members of any other species. 
C.  They function in the same way as the signals all animals use to communic ate. 
D.  They are acquired instinctively without having to be learned. 
27. The professor uses the sentence, "Move the large coyote fast," in order to illustrate two features of language. What are they? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] Displacement 
[B] Learnability 
[C] Productivity 
[D] Discreteness 
28. Listen to Track 9. 0 
A. To see if anyone knows the answer to the student's question 
B. To suggest that the student is using the wrong terminology 
C. To express frustration because she has already answered a similar question 
D. To determine whether she has been speaking clearly enough 
SPEAKING
This section measures your ability to speak in English about a variety of topics. 
There are four questions in this section. For each question, you will be given a short time to prepare your response. When the preparation time is up, answer the question as completely as possible in the time indicated for that question. You should record your responses so that you can review them later and compare them with the notes in the Answers section and scoring rubrics. 
1. You will now be asked to give your opinion about a familiar topic. Give yourself 15 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 45 seconds. 
Listen to Track 10. 0 Some people think that family members are the most important influence on young adults. 
Others believe that friends are the most important influence. Which do you agree with? 
Explain why. 
Preparation Time: 15 seconds 
Response Time: 45 seconds 
2. You will now read a short passage and listen to a conversation on the same topic. 
You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 11. 0 
Reading Time: 45 seconds 
Required Work Experience 
The business studies department at State University will now require all students enrolled in its program to complete one semester of work experience in a local corporation or small business. It is felt that students will benefit from this work experience by developing leadership and organizational skills that would not normally be learned in a classroom or campus setting. Furthermore , the relationships that students establish with the company that they work for may help them to secure permanent employment with that company once they have completed the program and graduated. 
Listen to Track 12. 0 
The woman expresses her opinion of the university's new policy. State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds 3. 
You will now read a short passage and listen to a lecture on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 13. 0 
Reading Time: 50 seconds 
The Establishing Shot Film directors use different types of camera shots for specific purposes. An establishing shot is an image shown briefly at the beginning of a scene, usually taken from far away, that is used to provide context for the rest of the scene. One purpose of the establishing shot is to communicate background information to the viewer, such as the setting-where and when the rest of the scene will occur. It also establishes the mood or feeling of the scene. Due to the context that the establishing shot provides, the characters and events that are shown next are better understood by the viewer. 
Listen to Track 14. 0
Using the professor's example, explain what an establishing shot is and how it is used. 
Preparat ion Time: 30 seconds
Response Time: 60 seconds 4. 
You will now listen to part of a lecture. You will then be asked a question about it. After you hear the question, give yourself 20 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 15. 0 
Using points from the lecture, explain how the passion plant and the potato plant defend themselves from insects. 
Preparation Time: 20 seconds Response Time: 60 seconds 
WRITING
This section measures your ability to write in English to communicate in an academic environment. 
There are two writing questions in this section. 
For question 1, you will read a passage and listen to a lecture about the same topic. You may take notes while you read and listen. Then you will write a response to a question based on what you have read and heard. You may look back at the passage when answering the question. You may use your notes to help you answer the question. You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. 
For question 2, you will write an essay based on your own knowledge and experience. You have 30 minutes to plan and complete your essay. .. . � "#::r.� Directions: Give yourself 3 minutes to read the passage. 
Reading Time: 3 minutes 
Archaeologists have recently found a fossil of a 150-million-year-old mammal known as Repenomamus robustus (R. robustus). Interestingly, the mammal's stomach contained the remains of a psittacosaur dinosaur. Some researchers have therefore suggested that R. robustus was an active hunter of dinosaurs. However, a closer analysis has made the hypothesis that R. robustus was an active hunter unlikely. It was probably just a scavenger that sometimes fed on dinosaur eggs containing unhatched dinosaur s. 
First, R. robustus, like most mammals living 150 million years ago, was small-only about the size of a domestic cat. It was much smaller than psittacosaurs, which were almost two meters tall when full grown. Given this size difference, it is unlikely that R.robustus would have been able to successfully hunt psittacosaurs or similar dinosaurs. 
Second, the legs of R. robustus appear much more suited for scavenging than hunting: they were short and positioned somewhat to the side rather than directly underneat h the animal. These features suggest that R. robustus did not chase after prey. Psittacosaur s-the type of dinosaur found in the stomach of R. robustus-were fast moving. It is unlikely that they would have been caught by such short-legged animals. 
Third, the dinosaur bones inside the stomach of the R. robustus provide no evidence to support the idea that the dinosaur had been actively hunted. When an animal has been hunted and eaten by another animal, there are usually teeth marks on the bones of the animal that was eaten. But the bones of the psittacosaur inside the R. robustus stomach do not have teeth marks. This suggests that R. robustus found an unguarded dinosaur nest with eggs and simply swallowed an egg with the small psittacosaur still inside the eggshell. 
Listen to Track 16. 0
Directions: You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. Your response will be judged on the basis of the quality of your writing and on how well your response presents the points in the lecture and their relationship to the reading passage. Typically, an effective response will be 150 to 225 words. 
Listen to Track 17. 0
Response Time: 20 minutes 
1. Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they respond to the specific points made in the reading passage. 
Directions: Read the question below. You have 30 minutes to plan, write, and revise your essay. 
Typically, an effective response will contain a minimum of 300 words. 
Response Time: 30 minutes 
2. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? 
Technology has made children less creative than they were in the past. 
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. Be sure to use your own words. 
Do not use memorized examples. 
ANSWERS
Reading Section 
1. c 16. C 
2. A 17. A 
3. C 18. B 
4. A 19. C 
5. C 20. B, D, E 
6. B 21. D 
7. B 22. C 
8. D 23. A 
9. D 24. A 
10. B, C, E 25. D 
11. A 26. B 
12. B 27. B, C 
13. D 28. B 
14. B 29. B 
15. A 30. B, C, F 
Listening Section 
1. A 
2. D 
3. B 
4. C 
5. C 
6. A 
7. C,D 
8. B 
9. B 
10. A 
11. C
12. C
13. B 
14. C
15. D 
16. A 
17. D 
18. D 
19. B 
20. A,D 
21. A 
22. c 23. C 
24. c 25. B 
26. A 
27. C, D 
28. B 
Speaking Section 
Prompts, Important Points, and Sample Responses with Rater Comments 
Use the sample Independent and Integrated Speaking Rubrics in Appendix A to see how responses are scored. The raters who listen to your responses will analyze them in three general categories. These categories are Delivery , Language Use, and Topic Development. All three categories have equal importance. 
This section includes important points that should be covered when answering each question. All of these points must be present in a response in order for it to receive the highest score in the Topic Development category . These important points are guides to the kind of information raters expect to hear in a high-level response. 
This section also refers to sample responses, which can be found on the audio tracks. Some responses were scored at the highest level, while others were not. The responses are followed by comments from certified ETS raters.
1: Paired Choice
Prompt 
Some people think that family members are the most important influence on young adults. Others believe that friends are the most important influence. Which do you agree with? Explain why. 
Important Points
In this question, you need to say whether you think family members or friends are the most important influence on young adults. Then you must explain why this is your preference. You should try to explain it fully; you should not just give a list of reasons. Instead, you should try to pick one or two reasons and explain your opinion in more detail. Add examples when appropr iate. If you think family members are the most important influence, for example, you could explain by discussing reasons such as the amount of time young adults spend with family versus friends, which gives family members more opportunities to influence them.
Sometimes test-takers would like to choose both options, saying, for example, that one might be more true in some circumstances and the other true in different circumstances. This approach is acceptable; however, it is difficult to then fully explain your opinion if you choose both options, and it might lower your score if you don't finish or don't sufficiently support both choices during your response time. Only very fluent speakers should use the approach of choosing both options. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 18. 0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker states her view that both family members and friends influence young adults depending on the stage of life they're in, and then supports this view fully by describing the stages of life when family and when friends have an influence. She provides examples of when family members are more influential and when friends are, and discusses the importance of friends when you're separated from your family, such as when you're away at college. Her pronunciation is clear and she does not need to pause to think of how to say her ideas in English. Sometimes her vocabulary choices are not perfect-for example, she says "how you wear" instead of "how you dress," but these errors are minor and the listener can still easily understand her ideas. 
Low-level Response: 
Listen to Track 19. O 
Rater Comments 
The speaker's pronunciation of individual words is fairly clear, but he pauses and hesitates often to think of the next word to say. His hesitations cause him to run out oftime before he can finish what he would like to say. This shows that he still needs to improve his fluency in English. Also, while he states which view he agrees with­that friends are the most important influence-he does not develop this idea with much detail. He says "they spend much of their time with their friends," but he doesn't explain why this causes friends to have more influence, possibly because he lacks the vocabulary to talk more about it. Instead, he simply repeats that friends are the most important influence. 
2: Fit and Explain 
Prompt 
The woman expresses her opinion of the university's new policy. State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion. 
Important Points 
When answering this question, it is important to include information from both the reading passage and the conversation between students. 
You should indicate that the woman disagrees with the business studies department's new policy, which requires students in the business department to spend one semester working in a local corporation or small business. You should also explain the two reasons she gives for disagreeing with this policy: she doesn't think students will actually develop leadership and/ or organizational skills at the jobs they would have to work, since they would be doing basic tasks that won't be meaningful; and she doesn't think that this experience will help students find permanent jobs in the future, since many other universities have similar programs and so there will be too much competition with other students. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 20. O 
Rater Comments 
This speaker clearly states the woman's opinion of the policy ("The woman believe that this policy is not a positive move"), a brief explanation of the policy, and the two reasons why she disagrees with the policy. The speaker makes a few very minor agreeme nt errors ("the woman believe"; "the abundance of university who"; "offered to student"), but these do not prevent listeners from understanding what the speaker is communicatin g. The speaker has very clear pronunciation and speaks at an even pace, making use of appropriate pauses and intonation. He is also able to use advanced vocabulary and grammatical structures effectively ("she believes that job that would be ... r:r y offered to student would be really low-level and lowresponsibility jobs which will not allow them to grow into and develop the qualities of leadership"; "contrary to what the policy says"). 
Low-level Response: 
Listen to Track 21. 0 
Rater Comments 
This speaker addresses the question, but does not provide a complete answer, and her response is overall somewhat difficult to follow. She states the woman's opinion, but does not explain what the woman is disagreeing with, since she only makes a vague reference to the policy "Girl says, say, say that uh recruiting proposed by university is not a good uh, um, uh, a good statement". While she does use some sophisticated vocabulary ("particular skills," "permanent employm ent"), she does not fully explain her ideas. For example, when she says, "he didn't give any particular skills in leadershi p or organization," she does not make it clear that she is talking about the woman's brother or his job experience, and how that relates to the new policy. Her pronunciation is clear, but her control of grammar is weak, which makes it difficult to understand her meaning: "when the student um attain graduation, have to compete with older students ... so there's no any .... " 
3: General/Specific 
Prompt 
Using the professor's example, explain what an establishing shot is and how it is used. 
Important Points In this item, you should explain that in a movie or film, an establishing shot is used at the beginning of a scene to provide context, such as place, time, and mood. The shot in the professor's example showed a detective's office in a city in the past (1940s), so the viewer knows that the rest of the scene takes place in the city in the 1940s. 
The shot in the example is filmed with darkness, rain, and shadows that give it a gloomy or mysterious feeling, so the viewer knows that the events which follow will be dark and mysterious. A high-level response will communicate in a coherent and organized way the purpose of the establishing shot (to let viewers know where and when the scene is taking place and to set a mood) and explain how the establishing shot in the professor's example carries out this purpose. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 22. 0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker clearly describes what an establishing shot is: "shown at the beginning of the movie, it gives like a sense of what the feeling is like in the movie." The professor's example is described accurately, with all important points included and connected clearly to the concept '(''it describes the movie beforehand, so he could tell that the movie was in the 1940s"). The speaker uses sophisticated language fluently ("by that he could tell that the movie was going to have a dark setting"). The speaker pauses several times to organize her thoughts, but the pauses are located at natural places and do not seriously interrupt the response. Although the speaker is rushed at the end, she remains understandab le and successfully includes all points. 
Low-level Response: 
Listen to Track 23. 0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker does manage to express the central idea of the establishing shot and partially describe the shot used in the professor's example. However, he does not have very strong control of grammar or vocabulary, often resulting in vague ideas ("gives some example using lights, or we are in an office, some very old office") or confusing statements ("that the director's, like, that the people concern about it"). Although the speaker connects the example to the concept, important parts of the example are left out (that the scene gave a gloomy and mysterious feeling, that it showed a city). The speaker's unclear pronunciation also requires the listener to work hard to understand his speech. Several important words cannot be understood at all, leaving the listener to guess at their meaning. N)uf-t"-.-': 
4: Summary 
Prompt
Using points from the lecture, explain how the passion plant and the potato plant defend themselves from insects. 
Important Points 
For this task, you should use the examples from the lecture to explain how plants defend themselves from insects. You should explain that plants can use both physical and chemical defenses. The passion plant uses a physical defense. This plant has spiky hairs on its leaves which prevent insects from landing on the plant and eating the leaves. The potato plant, on the other hand uses a chemical defense. This plant releases a chemical through its leaves when an insect eats it. The chemical makes the insect feel full, so it stops eating the plant. 
High-level Response: 
Listen to Track 24. 0 
Rater Comments 
The speaker gives a well-organized, clear response and is able to summarize all of the important informat ion from the lecture. He jumps immediately into a summary of the examples, but he shows a clear connection between the two examples to the main concept. Consider his sentence: "On the other side, potato plants uses chemical features to prevent being eaten by insects." Though there are some grammatical errors in this sentence, he uses a transitional phrase "on the other side," and he stresses the word "chemical" to emphasize the contrast between the two examples. He does speak very quickly at times, but he shows that he is able to communicate without too many pauses to search for words. He makes occasional pronunc iation errors but has the ability to correct himself. For instance, he describes the chemical defenses that the potato plant uses "to prevent being eaten." At first, "being eaten" is pronounced incorrectly, but he quickly corrects his pronunciation and continues with the response. 
Mid-level Response: 
Listen to Track 25. 0 
Rater Comments 
This speaker is able to convey all of the important points from the lecture, but her response takes some effort to understand. She pauses frequently, searching for words. She clearly understood and is able to explain both examples, but her vocabulary is sometimes vague ("the potato plant has some, like, chemical things") or inaccurate. For instance, in the first point about the passion plant, she describes the spikes "which prevent him from the insect" instead of "which protect it from the insect." Her pronunciation is mostly easy to understand, but she does make a few mistakes that confuse her meaning. For example, while describing the chemical defenses of the potato plant, she says that "the insect doesn't feel hungry," but her pronunciation of "hungry" sounds more like "angry." 
Writing Section 
Prompts, Topic Notes, and Sample Responses with Rater Comments 
Use the sample Integrated and Independent Writing Rubrics in Appendix A to see how responses are scored. 
This section includes topic notes that are guides to the kind of information raters expect to read in a high�level response. 
This section also refers to sample responses, which can be found on the audio tracks. These responses were scored at the highest level. The responses are followed by comments from certified ETS raters.
Question 1 
Prompt 
Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they respond to the specific points made in the reading passage. 
Topic Notes 
The reading discusses three reasons to believe that a small mammal, R. robustus, could not have been an active hunter (perhaps it was a scavenger that sometimes fed on unhatched eggs of the psitticos aur dinosaur}, but the lecturer presents reasons why each of these three reasons are unconvincing. 
Point made in the reading 
R. robustus was smaller than psitticosaurs. So given their size, R. robustus was not likely to be a successful hunter of psitticosaurs or similar dinosaurs. 
R. robustus would not have been able to move fast enough to catch prey because it had short legs positioned to the side. 
The lack of teeth marks on the bones found in the stomach of R. robustus indicates it was not an active hunter (and that it probably just swallowed a dinosaur egg whole). 
Corresponding point from the lecture 
R. robustus was too small to hunt adult psitticosaurs, but it could have hunted baby psitticosaurs or other similarly sized dinosaurs-prey that was smaller than or had less mass than R. robustus. 
There is a modern day mammal, the Tasmanian Devil, that has the same leg features as R. Robustus but can achieve speeds fast enough to make it an effective predator. 
R. robustus probably swallowed its prey whole or in large pieces; R. robustus had no marks on its back teeth, which were probably not used for chewing. 
Responses with scores of 4 and 5 typically discuss all three points in the table. 
Sample Response 
The lecture completely refutes the reading passage. The professor use the following points to indicate that R. robustus could have been actively hunting baby psittacosaur and similar sized baby dinosaurs. 
First, although R. robustus was small, it was much bigger than baby psittacosaurs dinosaur, more than twice in size. This means R. robustus was big enough to hunt baby psittacosaurs. 
Second, even though R. robustus had short legs and they were positioned somewhat to the side, these features are not sufficient indications that R. robustus could not run as fast enough to be successful predator. The professor pointed out that Tasmanian Devil, a morden-day successful predator whose legs share similar "disadvantag es", can run as fast as 50 KM/H and is an active and very successful hunter today. So its possible R. robustus could run just as fast and therefore be as successful in hunting. 
Last but not the least, lack of teeth marks on the dinosaur bones is not enough evidence to support conclusion that the dinosaur was not actively hunted. Studies of fossil records show that though R. robustus had powerful jaws but also, it did not use its back-teeth for chewing because its back teeth had no wear and tear. So we can also guess that R. robustus could had swallowed the baby dinosaur whole and therefore not leaving any teeth marks. 
Rater Comments 
This response earns a score of 5. Grammatical errors are few and minor. This response clearly conveys the three main points from the lecture and shows how those points challenge the information from the three points in the reading passage. Note that the response does not discuss the dinosaur egg to get the point across as to why the bones of the prey did not contain teeth marks; although this would have been helpful, it could be argued that this is not essential information for conveying the point clearly. Therefore, even though this last sentence is not quite as clear as the rest of this response, holistically, it still conveys all of the relevant information with sufficient clarity to rate a score of 5. 
Question 2 
Prompt
Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? 
Technology has made children less creative than they were in the past. 
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. 
Topic Notes 
This topic asks you whether you believe technology has negatively affected children's creativit y over time. Successful responses can agree with the statement, disagree with the statement, or show the merits of both positions. No matter which position you take, it is important to support your opinion with details and examples. 
If you agree with the stateme nt and believe that technology stifles children's creativit y, you might support that by explaining how the computer keeps kids in the home and away from other kids; the abilit y to deploy communication skills in face-to-face situations, suffers as a consequence, and this in turn hinders the development of creativit y. You might argue that children who experience the world by being out in it rather than being on line all the time can use their imagination to create their own games or put on performances; however, this has become very rare these days because with the advancement of technology, most forms of entertainment that kids are interested in are ready-made. You could even extend the argument to say that this is becoming a problem with modern life in general: most problems have been solved, so no special thinking or creativit y by anyone-whether it be adults or kids-is needed these days to deal with new situations or problems. 
If you disagree with the statement, you might point out and develop the ways in which technology stimulates the imagination. Rather than stifling creativity, technology allows kids to engage in such creative endeavors as producing their own biogs and websites, or designing clever and interesting new games and apps for computers or phones. More resources and viewpoints than ever before are now within reach of most people, including children, because technology has provided us with new ways to access such a wealth of information; this exposure can lead to enhanced creativity. In a response that explores reasons for disagreei ng with the statement, you might co me to the conclusion that the meaning of creativity itself has shifted over time. 
Sample Response
Technology is today part of the everyday life; we are surrounded it by it and can't live without it. But despite all the good things that derive from technology, I strongly agree that there are some ways that technology causes children to think less. 
For one thing, there is almost no information that cannot be found on the internet. When it comes to reading, many high school students agree to refer to "notes" sites instead of reading a complete book assigned by their teachers. These sites usually map out the important stories, passages, and characters for the student. This destroys creativity by not allowing the student to understand the story on his or her own and discover the true personal meanings of the assignment. An activity such as reading is suppose to question one's intellect and challenge one's thinking but with these sites available, kids now rely on the information given and fail to appreciate and grow that is the purpose of reading many books. 
During other activities encountered in school, such as projects, children now tend to rely on the internet to come up with ideas. I have observed this many times. When a creative assignment is given by the teacher, instead of brainstorming ideas together, children just hop on a computer and search for ideas on the internet. It's one thing to use the internet as a tool as oppose to using it incessantly and not letting your imagination and creativity take charge. 
Other forms of technology such as video games a nd TV has a great impact on using up time that used to be devoted to imagination and creative activities. Before TV and computer, children invented their world just on their own f ...... � using their fantasy when building things with blocks or being outdoors in the nature. They used simple things for constructing adventures and had great ideas for new games together or alone. 
This means they learn to be creative and also self­determined and self-conscious. Nowaday, how can they learn these skills when passi vely watching TV or doing what the computer says? 
In summary, there is a lot about technolo gy that takes away from chances for children to be creative and develop creative skills. 
Rater Comments 
This 5-level response mainly presents examples of how technology has reduced opportunities to be creative and develop creative skills. The writer first discusses the existence of book summaries and interpretive notes on Web sites, and explains how students use this information instead of actually reading books assigned at school; this results in students not being able to read well or form their own creative interpretations of what they are reading. In the third paragraph the writer talks about students getting ideas for projects from Web sites instead of interacting with other students to creatively brainstorm ideas together. And in the fourth paragraph the writer explains that what used to be time for creative fantasizing or inventing playtime activities has now been replaced by time watching TV or following instructions on the computer. This response is well-organized and unified, and gives ample support for the writer's point of view. Grammatical errors are very minor and a variety of complex structures are used.