READING
This section measures your ability to understand academic passages in English. 
There are three passages in the section. Give yourself 18 minutes to read each passage and answer the  questions about it. The entire section will take 54 minutes to complete. 
You may look back at a passage when answering the questions. You can skip questions and go  back to them later as long as there is time remaining.
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete  this practice set. 
POWERING THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION 
In Britain one of the most dramatic changes of the Industrial Revolution was the harnessing of  power. Until the reign of George Ill (1760-1820), available sources of power for work and travel had  not increased since the Middle Ages. There were three sources of power: animal or human muscles;  the wind, operating on sail or windmill; and running water. Only the last of these was suited at all  to the continuous operating of machines, and although waterpower abounded in Lancashire and  Scotland and ran grain mills as well as textile mills, it had one great disadvantage: streams flowed  where nature intended them to, and water-driven factories had to be located on their banks,  whether or not the location was desirable for other reasons. Furthermore, even the most reliable  waterpower varied with the seasons and disappeared in a drought. The new age of machinery, in  short, could not have been born without a new source of both movable and constant power. 
The source had long been known but not exploited. Early in the century, a pump had come  into use in which expanding steam raised a piston in a cylinder, and atmospheric pressure brought  it down again when the steam condensed inside the cylinder to form a vacuum. This "atmospheric  engine," invented by Thomas Savery and vastly improved by his partner, Thomas Newcomen,  embodied revolutionary principles, but it was so slow and wasteful of fuel that it could not be  employed outside the coal mines for which it had been designed. In the 1760s, James Watt  perfected a separate condenser for the steam, so that the cylinder did not have to be cooled at  every stroke; then he devised a way to make the piston turn a wheel and thus convert reciprocating  (back and forth) motion into rotary motion. He thereby transformed an inefficient pump of limited  use into a steam engine of a thousand uses. The final step came when steam was introduced into  the cylinder to drive the piston backward as well as forward, thereby increasing the speed of the  engine and cutting its fuel consumption. 
Watt's steam engine soon showed what it could do. It liberated industry from dependence on  running water. The engine eliminated water in the mines by driving efficient pumps, which made  possible deeper and deeper mining. The ready availability of coal inspired William Murdoch during the  1790s to develop the first new form of nighttime illumination to be discovered in a millennium and a  half. Coal gas rivaled smoky oil lamps and flickering candles, and early in the new century, well-to-do  Londoners grew accustomed to gaslit houses and even streets. Iron manufacturers, which had starved  for fuel while depending on charcoal, also benefited from ever-increasing supplies of coal; blast  furnaces with steam-powered bellows turned out more iron and steel for the new machinery. Steam  became the motive force of the Industrial Revolution, as coal and iron ore were the raw materials. 
By 1800 more than a thousand steam engines were in use in the British Isles, and Britain retained  a virtual monopoly on steam engine production until the 1830s. Steam power did not merely spin  cotton and roll iron; early in the new century, it also multiplied ten times over the amount of paper  that a single worker could produce in a day. At the same time, operators of the first printing presses  run by steam rather than by hand found it possible to produce a thousand pages in an hour rather  than thirty. Steam also promised to eliminate a transportation problem not fully solved by either  canal boats or turnpikes . Boats could carry heavy weights, but canals could not cross hilly terrain;  turnpikes could cross the hills, but the roadbeds could not stand up under great weights. These  problems needed still another solution, and the ingredients for it lay close at hand. In some industrial  regions, heavily laden wagons, with flanged wheels, were being hauled by horses along metal rails; 2 and the stationary steam engine was puffing in the factory and mine. Another generation passed  before inventors succeeded in combining these ingredients, by putting the engine on wheels and  the wheels on the rails, so as to provide a machine to take the place of the horse. Thus the railroad  age sprang from what had already happened in the eighteenth century. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
In Britain one of the most dramatic changes of the Industrial Revolution was the harnessing of  power. Until the reign of George Ill (1760-1820), available sources of power for work and travel had  not increased since the Middle Ages. There were three sources of power: animal or human muscles;  the wind, operating on sail or windmill; and running water. Only the last of these was suited at all  to the continuous operating of machines, and although waterpower abounded in Lancashire and Scotland and ran grain mills as well as textile mills, it had one great disadvantage: streams flowed  where nature intended them to, and water-driven factories had to be located on their banks,  whether or not the location was desirable for other reasons. Furtherm ore, even the most reliable  waterpower varied with the seasons and disappeared in a drought. The new age of machinery, in  short, could not have been born without a new source of both movable and constant power. 
The source had long been known but not exploited. Early in the century, a pump had come  into use in which expanding steam raised a piston in a cylinder, and atmospher ic pressure brought  it down again when the steam condensed inside the cylinder to form a vacuum. This "atmospheric  engine," invented by Thomas Savery and vastly improved by his partner, Thomas Newcomen,  embodied revolutionary principles, but it was so slow and wasteful of fuel that it could not be  employed outside the coal mines for which it had been designed. In the 1760s, James Watt  perfected a separate condenser for the steam, so that the cylinder did not have to be cooled at  every stroke; then he devised a way to make the piston turn a wheel and thus convert reciprocating  (back and forth) motion into rotary motion. He thereby transformed an inefficient pump of limited  use into a steam engine of a thousand uses. The final step came when steam was introduced into  the cylinder to drive the piston backward as well as forward, thereby increasing the speed of the  engine and cutting its fuel consumption. 
1. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted  sentence in paragraph 1? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave  out essential information. 
A. Running water was the best power source for factories since it could keep machines  operating continuously , but since it was abundant only in Lancashire and Scotland, most  mills and factories that were located elsewhere could not be water driven. 
B. The disadvantage of using waterpower is that streams do not necessarily flow in places  that are the most suitable for factories, which explains why so many water-powered  grain and textile mills were located in undesirable places. 
C. Since machines could be operated continuously only where running water was  abundant, grain and textile mills, as well as other factories, tended to be located only in  Lancashire and Scotland.  
D. Running water was the only source of power that was suitable for the continuous  operation of machines, but to make use of it, factories had to be located where the water  was, regardless of whether such locations made sense otherwise.
2. Which of the following best describes the relationship of paragraph 2 to paragraph 1? 
A.  Paragraph 2 shows how the problem discussed in paragraph 1 arose. 
B.  Paragraph 2 explains how the problem presented in paragraph 1 came to be solved. 
C.  Paragraph 2 provides a more technical discussion of the problem introduced in paragraph 1. 
D.  Paragraph 2 shows why the problem discussed in paragraph 1 was especially important 
to solve. 
3. According to paragraph 2, the "atmospheric engine" was slow because 
A.  it had been designed to be used in coal mines 
B.  the cylinder had to cool between each stroke 
C.  it made use of expanding steam to raise the piston in its cylinder 
D.  it could be operated only when a large supply of fuel was available 
4. According to paragraph 2, Watt's steam engine differed from earlier steam engines in each of  the following ways EXCEPT: 
A.  It used steam to move a piston in a cylinder. 
B.  It worked with greater speed. 
C.  It was more efficient in its use of fuel. 
D.  It could be used in many different ways. 
Watt's steam engine soon showed what it could do. It liberated industry from dependence on  running water. The engine eliminated water in the mines by driving efficient pumps, which made  possible deeper and deeper mining. The ready availability of coal inspired William Murdoch during  the 1790s to develop the first new form of nighttime illumination to be discovered in a millennium  and a half. Coal gas rivaled smoky oil lamps and flickering candles, and early in the new century,  well-to-do Londoners grew accustomed to gaslit houses and even streets. Iron manufacturers,  which had starved for fuel while depending on charcoal, also benefited from ever-increasing  supplies of coal; blast furnaces with steam-powered bellows turned out more iron and steel for the  new machinery. Steam became the motive force of the Industrial Revolution, as coal and iron ore  were the raw materials. 
5. In paragraph 3, the author mentions William Murdoch's invention of a new form of nighttime illumination in order to 
A. indicate one of the important developments made possible by the introduction of Watt's  steam engine 
B. make the point that Watt's steam engine was not the only invention of importance to the  Industrial Revolution 
C. illustrate how important coal was as a raw material for the Industrial Revolution 
D. provide an example of another eighteenth-century invention that used steam as a power source
6. The phrase "grew accustomed to" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A.  began to prefer 
B.  wanted to have 
C.  became used to 
D.  insisted on 
By 1800 more than a thousand steam engines were in use in the British Isles, and Britain  retained a virtual monopoly on steam engine production until the 1830s. Steam power did not  merely spin cotton and roll iron; early in the new century, it also multiplied ten times over the  amount of paper that a single worker could produce in a day. At the same time, operators of the  first printing presses run by steam rather than by hand found it possible to produce a thousand  pages in an hour rather than thirty. Steam also promised to eliminate a transportation problem  not fully solved by either canal boats or turnpikes. Boats could carry heavy weights, but canals  could not cross hilly terrain; turnpikes could cross the hills, but the roadbeds could not stand up  under great weights. These problems needed still another solution, and the ingredients for it lay  close at hand. In some industrial regions, heavily laden wagons, with flanged wheels, were being  hauled by horses along metal rails; and the stationary steam engine was puffing in the factory and  mine. 
Another generation passed before inventors succeeded in combining these ingredients, by  putting the engine on wheels and the wheels on the rails, so as to provide a machine to take  the place of the horse. Thus the railroad age sprang from what had already happened in the  eighteenth century. 
7. According to paragraph 4, which of the following statements about steam engines is true? 
A.  They were used for the production of paper but not for printing. 
B.  By 1800, significant numbers of them were produced outside of Britain. 
C.  They were used in factories before they were used to power trains. 
D.  They were used in the construction of canals and turnpikes. 
8. According to paragraph 4, providing a machine to take the place of the horse involved combining which two previously separate ingredients? 
A.  Turnpikes and canals 
B.  Stationary steam engines and wagons with flanged wheels 
C.  Metal rails in roadbeds and wagons capable of carrying heavy loads 
D.  Canal boats and heavily laden wagons
(A) Watt's steam engine soon showed what it could do. (B)It liberated industry from dependence  on running water. (C) The engine eliminated water in the mines by driving efficient pumps, which  made possible deeper and deeper mining. (D) The ready availability of coal inspired William  Murdoch during the 1790s to develop the first new form of nighttime illumination to be discovered  in a millennium and a half. Coal gas rivaled smoky oil lamps and flickering candles, and early in  the new century, well-to-do Londoners grew accustomed to gaslit houses and even streets. Iron  manufacturers, which had starved for fuel while depending on charcoal, also benefited from  ever-increasing supplies of coal; blast furnaces with steam-powered bellows turned out more iron  and steel for the new machinery . Steam became the motive force of the Industrial Revolution, as  coal and iron ore were the raw materials. 
9. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (B), (C), and (D)  indicate where the following sentence could be added.  The factories did not have to go to the streams when power could come to the factories.  Where would the sentence best fit? 
A.  Choice A 
B.  Choice B 
C.  Choice C 
D.  Choice D
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided on  the next page. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express  the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary  because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the  passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of  your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
The Industrial Revo lution would not have been possible without a new source of  power that was efficient, movable, and continuously available .
Answer Choices 
[A] In the early eighteenth century, Savery and Newcomen discovered that expanding steam  could be used to raise a piston in a cylinder. 
[B] In the mid-1700s, James Watt transformed an inefficient steam pump into a fast, flexible,  fuel-efficient engine. 
[C] Watt's steam engine played a leading role in greatly increasing industrial production of  all kinds. 
[D] In the 1790s, William Murdoch developed a new way of lighting houses and streets using  coal gas. 
[E] Until the 1830s, Britain was the world's major producer of steam engines. 
[F] The availability of steam engines was a major factor in the development of railroads,  which solved a major transportation problem.
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete  this practice set. 
WILLIAM SMITH 
In 1769 in a little town in Oxfordshire, England, a child with the very ordinary name of William  Smith was born into the poor family of a village blacksmith. He received rudimentary village  schooling, but mostly he roamed his uncle's farm collecting the fossils that were so abundant  in the rocks of the Cotswold hills. When he grew older, William Smith taught himself surveying  from books he bought with his small savings, and at the age of eighteen he was apprenticed to  a surveyor of the local parish. He then proceeded to teach himself geology, and when he was  twenty-four, he went to work for the company that was excavating the Somerset Coal Canal in the  south of England. 
This was before the steam locomotive, and canal building was at its height. The companies  building the canals to transport coal needed surveyors to help them find the coal deposits worth  mining as well as to determine the best courses for the canals. This job gave Smith an opportunity  to study the fresh rock outcrops created by the newly dug canal. He later worked on similar jobs  across the length and breadth of England, all the while studying the newly revealed strata and  collecting all the fossils he could find. Smith used mail coaches to travel as much as 10,000 miles  per year. In 1815 he published the first modern geological map, "A Map of the Strata of England and  Wales with a Part of Scotland," a map so meticulously researched that it can still be used today.  
In 1831 when Smith was finally recognized by the Geological Society of London as the "father  of English geology," it was not only for his maps but also for something even more important. Ever  since people had begun to catalog the strata in particular outcrops, there had been the hope that  these could somehow be used to calculate geological time. But as more and more accumulations  of strata were cataloged in more and more places, it became clear that the sequences of rocks  sometimes differed from region to region and that no rock type was ever going to become a  reliable time marker throughout the world. Even without the problem of regional differences,  rocks present a difficulty as unique time markers. Quartz is quartz-a silicon ion surrounded by  four oxygen ions-there's no difference at all between two-million-year-old Pleistocene quartz  and Cambrian quartz created over 500 million years ago. 
As he collected fossils from strata throughout England, Smith began to see that the fossils told  a different story from the rocks. Particularly in the younger strata, the rocks were often so similar  that he had trouble distinguishing the strata, but he never had trouble telling the fossils apart.  While rock between two consistent strata might in one place be shale and in another sandstone,  the fossils in that shale or sandstone were always the same. Some fossils endured through so many  millions of years that they appear in many strata, but others occur only in a few strata, and a few  species had their births and extinctions within one particular stratum. Fossils are thus identifying markers for particular periods in Earth's history. 
Not only could Smith identify rock strata by the fossils they contained, he could also see a  pattern emerging: certain fossils always appear in more ancient sediments, while others begin to be  seen as the strata become more recent. By following the fossils, Smith was able to put all the strata  of England' s earth into relative temporal sequence. About the same time, Georges Cuvier made  the same discovery while studying the rocks around Paris. Soon it was realized that this principal of  fauna I (animal) succession was valid not only in England or France but virtually everywhere. It was  actually a principle of floral succession as well, because plants showed the same transformation through time as did fauna. Limestone may be found in the Cambrian or-300 million years later in the Jurassic strata, but a trilobite-the ubiquitous marine arthropod that had its birth in the  Cambrian-will never be found in Jurassic strata, nor a dinosaur in the Cambrian .  
Directions: Now answer the questions . 
In 1769 in a little town in Oxfordsh ire, England, a child with the very ordinary name of Wiiliam  Smith was born into the poor family of a village blacksmith. He received rudimentary village  schooling, but mostly he roamed his uncle's farm collecting the fossils that were so abundant  in the rocks of the Cotswold hills. When he grew older, William Smith taught himself surveying  from books he bought with his small savings, and at the age of eighteen he was apprenticed to  a surveyor of the local parish. He then proceeded to teach himself geology , and when he was  twenty-four, he went to work for the company that was excavating the Somerset Coal Canal in the  south of England. 
11. According to paragraph 1, which of the following statements about William Smith is NOT true? 
A.  Smith learned surveying by reading and by apprenticing for a local surveyor. 
B.  Smith's family lived in a small English town and possessed little wealth. 
C.  Smith learned about fossils from books he borrowed from his uncle. 
D.  Smith eventually left his village to work on the excavation of an English canal. 
This was before the steam locomotive, and canal building was at its height. The companies  building the canals to transport coal needed surveyors to help them find the coal deposits  , worth mining as well as to determine the best courses for the canals. This job gave Smith an opportunity to study the fresh rock outcrops created by the newly dug canal. He later worked on similar jobs across the length and breadth of England, all the while studying the newly revealed A  strata and collecting all the fossils he could find. Smith used mail coaches to travel as much as 2 10,000 miles per year. In 1815 he published the first modern geolo gical map, "A Map of the Strata of England and Wales with a Part of Scotland," a map so meticulou sly researched that it can still be used today. 
12. According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true of the map published by William Smith? 
A.  It indicates the locations of England's major canals. 
B.  It became most valuable when the steam locomotive made rail travel possible. 
C.  The data for the map were collected during Smith's work on canals. 
D.  It is no longer regarded as a geological masterpi ece. 
13. The word "meticulously" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A.  carefully 
B.  quickly 
C.  frequently 
D.  obviously
In 1831 when Smith was finally recognized by the Geological Society of London as the "father  of English geology," it was not only for his maps but also for something even more important. Ever  since people had begun to catalog the strata in particular outcrops, there had been the hope that  these could someho w be used to calculate geological time. But as more and more accumulations  of strata were cataloged in more and more places, it became clear that the sequences of rocks  sometimes differed from region to region and that no rock type was ever going to become a  reliable time marker throughout the world. Even without the problem of regional differenc es,  rocks present a difficulty as unique time markers. Quartz is quartz-a silicon ion surrounded by  four oxygen ions-there's no difference at all between two-million-year-old Pleistocene quartz  and Cambrian quartz created over 500 million years ago.  
14. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted  sentence in paragraph 3? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave  out essential information. 
A. The discovery of regional differences in the sequences of rocks led geologists to believe  that rock types could some day become reliable time markers. 
B. Careful analysis of strata revealed that rocks cannot establish geological time because  the pattern of rock layers varies from place to place. 
C. Smith's catalogs of rock strata indicated that the sequences of rocks are different from  place to place and from region to region. 
C. Because people did not catalog regional differences in sequences of rocks, it was  believed that rocks could never be reliable time markers. 
As he collected fossils from strata throughout England, Smith began to see that the fossils told  a different story from the rocks. Particularly in the younger strata, the rocks were often so similar  that he had trouble distinguishing the strata, but he never had trouble telling the fossils apart.  While rock between two consistent strata might in one place be shale and in another sandstone,  the fossils in that shale or sandstone were always the same. Some fossils endured through so many  millions of years that they appear in many strata, but others occur only in a few strata, and a few  species had their births and extinctions within one particular stratum. Fossils are thus identifying  markers for particular periods in Earth's history. 
15. The word "endured" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A.  vanished 
B.  developed 
C.  varied 
D.  survived 
Not only could Smith identify rock strata by the fossils they contained, he could also see a  pattern emerging: certain fossils always appear in more ancient sediments, while others begin to be  seen as the strata become more recent. By following the fossils, Smith was able to put all the strata  of England's earth into relative temporal sequence. About the same time, Georges Cuvier made  the same discovery while studying the rocks around Paris. Soon it was realized that this principal of  faunal (animal) succession was valid not only in England or France but virtually everywhere. It was  actually a principle of floral succession as well, because plants showed the same transformation  through time as did fauna. Limestone may be found in the Cambrian or-300 million years laterin the Jurassic strata, but a trilobite-the ubiquitous marine arthropod that had its birth in the  Cambrian-will never be found in Jurassic strata, nor a dinosaur in the Cambrian. 
16. The word "virtually" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A.  possibly 
B.  absolutely 
C.  surprisingly 
D.  nearly 
17. Select the TWO answer choices that are true statements based upon the discussion of the  principle of fauna! succession in paragraph 5. To receive credit, you must select TWO answers. 
[A] It was a principle that applied to fauna but not to flora. 
[B] It was discovered independently by two different geologists. 
[C] It describes how fossils are distributed in rock strata. 
[D] It explains why plants and animals undergo transformations through time. 
18. In mentioning "trilobite," the author is making which of the following points? 
A.  Fossils cannot be found in more than one rock stratum. 
B.  Fauna I succession can help put rock layers in relative temporal sequence. 
C.  Fauna I succession cannot be applied to different strata composed of the same kind of rock. 
D.  The presence of trilobite fossils makes it difficult to date a rock.
Not only could Smith identify rock strata by the fossils they contained, he could also see a  pattern emerging: certain fossils always appear in more ancient sediments, while others begin  to be seen as the strata become more recent. (A) By following the fossils, Smith was able to  put all the strata of England's earth into relative temporal sequence. (B) About the same time,  Georges Cuvier made the same discovery while studying the rocks around Paris. (C) Soon it was  realized that this principal of faunal (animal) succession was valid not only in England or France  but virtually everywhere. (D) It was actually a principle of floral succession as well, because  plants showed the same transformation through time as did fauna. Limestone may be found in  the Cambrian or-300 million years later-in the Jurassic strata, but a trilobite-the ubiquitous  marine arthropod that had its birth in the Cambrian-will never be found in Jurassic strata, nor a  dinosaur in the Cambrian. 
19. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (B), (C), and (D)  indicate where the following sentence could be added.  The findings of these geologists inspired others to examine the rock and fossil records  in different parts of the world.  Where would the sentence best fit? 
A.  Choice A 
B.  Choice B 
C.  Choice C 
D.  Choice D 
20. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. 
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most  important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they  express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage.  Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of  your answer choice or you can copy the sentence.  William Smith's contributions to geology have increased our knowledge of the  Earth's history .
Answer Choices 
[A] Smith found success easily in his profession because he came from a family of geologists  and surveyors. 
[B] Smith's work on canals allowed him to collect fossils and study rock layers all over England. 
[C] Smith found that fossils are much more reliable indicators of geological time than rock  strata are. 
[D] Smith was named "the father of English geology" for his maps rather than for his other  contributions to the field. 
[E] Smith and Cuvier discovered that fossil patterns are easier to observe in ancient rock  strata than in younger rock strata. 
[F] The discovery of the principle of faunal succession allowed geologists to establish the  relative age of Earth's rock layers.
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete 
this practice set. 
INFANTILE AMNESIA 
What do you remember about your life before you were three? Few people can remember  anything that happened to them in their earl y years. Adults' memories of the next few years also  tend to be scanty. Most people remember only a few events-usuall y ones that were meaningful  and distinctive, such as being hospitalized or a sibling's birth.  
How might this inability to recall early experiences be explained? The sheer passage of time  does not account for it; adults have excellent recognition of pictures of people who attended  high school with them 35 years earlier. Another seemingly plausible explanation-that infants do  not form enduring memories at this point in development-also is incorrect. Children two and a  half to three years old remember experiences that occurred in their first year, and eleven month  olds remember some events a year later. Nor does the hypothesis that infantile amnesia reflects  repression-o r holding back-of sexually charged episodes explain the phenomenon. While  such repression may occur, people cannot remember ordinary events from the infant and toddler  periods, either. 
Three other explanations seem more promising. One involves physiological changes relevant  to memory. Maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain continues throughout early childhood,  and this part of the brain may be critical for remembering particula r episodes in ways that can  be retrieved later. Demonstrations of infants' and toddlers' long-term memory have involved  their repeating motor activities that they had seen or done earlier, such as reaching in the dark for  objects, putting a bottle in a doll's mouth, or pulling apart two pieces of a toy. The brain's level of  physiological maturation may support these types of memories, but not ones requiring explicit  verbal descriptions. 
A second explanation involves the influence of the social world on children's language use.  Hearing and telling stories about events may help children store information in ways that will  endure into later childhood and adulthood. Through hearing stories with a clear beginning,  middle, and ending, children may learn to extract the gist of events in ways that they will be able  to describe many years later. Consistent with this view, parents and children increasingly engage in  discussions of past events when children are about three years old. However, hearing such stories  is not sufficient for younger children to form enduring memories. Telling such stories to two year  olds does not seem to produce long-lasting verbalizable memories. 
A third likely explanation for infantile amnesia involves incompatibilities between the ways  in which infants encode' information and the ways in which older children and adults retrieve it.  Whether people can remember an event depends critically on the fit between the way in which they  earlier encoded the information and the way in which they later attempt to retrieve it. The better able  the person is to reconstruct the perspective from which the material was encoded, the more likely  that recall will be successful. 
This view is supported by a variety of factors that can create mismatches between very young  children's encoding and older children's and adults' retrieval efforts. The world looks very different  to a person whose head is only two or three feet above the ground than to one whose head is five  or six feet above it. Older children and adults often try to retrieve the names of things they saw,  but infants would not have encoded the information verbally. General knowledge of categories of  events such as a birthday party or a visit to the doctor's office helps older individuals encode their experiences, but again, infants and toddlers are unlikely to encode many experiences within such  knowledge structures. 
These three explanations of infantile amnesia are not mutually exclusive; indeed, they  support each other. Physiological immaturity may be part of why infants and toddlers do not form  extremely enduring memories, even when they hear stories that promote such remembering in  preschoolers. Hearing the stories may lead preschoolers to encode aspects of events that allow  them to form memories they can access as adults. Conversely, improved encoding of what they  hear may help them better understand and remember stories and thus make the stories more  useful for remembering future events. Thus, all three explanations-physiological maturation,  hearing and producing stories about past events, and improved encoding of key aspects of  events-seem likely to be involved in overcoming infantile amnesia. 
1. encode: transfer information from one system of communication into another 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
How might this inability to recall early experiences be explained? The sheer passage of time  does not account for it; adults have excellent recognition of pictures of people who attended  high school with them 35 years earlier. Another seemingly plausible explanation-that infants do  not form enduring memories at this point in development-also is incorrect. Children two and a  half to three years old remember experiences that occurred in their first year, and eleven month  olds remember some events a year later. Nor does the hypothesis that infantile amnesia reflects  repression-or holding back-of sexually charged episodes explain the phenomenon. While  such repression may occur, people cannot remember ordinary events from the infant and toddler  periods, either. 
21. What purpose does paragraph 2 serve in the larger discussion of children's inability to recall  early experiences? 
A. To argue that theories that are not substantiated by evidence should generally be  considered unreliable 
B. To argue that the hypotheses mentioned in paragraph 2 have been more thoroughly  researched than have the theories mentioned later in the passage 
C. To explain why some theories about infantile amnesia are wrong before presenting ones  more likely to be true 
D. To explain why infantile amnesia is of great interest to researchers 
22. The word "phenomenon" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A.  exception 
B.  repetition 
C.  occurrence 
D.  idea
23. All of the following theories about the inability to recall early experiences are rejected in paragraph 2 EXCEPT: 
A.  The ability to recall an event decreases as the time after the event increases. 
B.  Young children are not capable of forming memories that last for more than a short time. 
C.  People may hold back sexually meaningful memories. 
D.  Most events in childhood are too ordinary to be worth remembering. 
Three other explanations seem more promising. One involves physiological changes relevant  to memory. Maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain continues throughout early childhood,  and this part of the brain may be critical for remembering particular episodes in ways that can  be retrieved later. Demonstrations of infants' and toddlers' long-term memory have involved  their repeating motor activities that they had seen or done earlier, such as reaching in the dark for  objects, putting a bottle in a doll's mouth, or pulling apart two pieces of a toy. The brain's level of  physiological maturation may support these types of memories, but not ones requiring explicit  verbal descriptions. 
24. What does paragraph 3 suggest about long-term memory in children? 
A. Maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain is important for the long-term memory of  motor activities but not verbal descriptions. 
B. Young children may form long-term memories of actions they see earlier than of things  they hear or are told. 
C. Young children have better long-term recall of short verbal exchanges than of long ones. 
D.  Children's long-term recall of motor activities increases when such activities are  accompanied by explicit verbal descriptions. 
A second explanation involves the influence of the social world on children's language use.  Hearing and telling stories about events may help children store information in ways that will  endure into later childhood and adulthood. Through hearing stories with a clear beginning,  middle, and ending, children may learn to extract the gist of events in ways that they will be able  to describe many years later. Consistent with this view, parents and children increasingly engage in  discussions of past events when children are about three years old. However, hearing such stories  is not sufficient for younger children to form enduring memories. Telling such stories to two year  olds does not seem to produce long-lasting verbalizable memories. 
25. According to paragraph 4, what role may storytelling play in forming childhood memories? 
A.  It may encourage the physiological maturing of the brain. 
B.  It may help preschool children tell the difference between ordinary and unusual memories. 
C.  It may help preschool children retrieve memories quickly. 
D.  It may provide an ordered structure that facilitates memory retrieval.
A third likely explanation for infantile amnesia involves incompatibilities between the ways in  which infants encode' information and the ways in which older children and adults retrieve it.  Whether people can remember an event depends critically on the fit between the way in which  they earlier encoded the information and the way in which they later attempt to retrieve it. The  better able the person is to reconstruct the perspective from which the material was encoded,  the more likely that recall will be successful.  
This view is supported by a variety of factors that can create mismatches between very young  children's encoding and older children's and adults' retrieval efforts. The world looks very different  to a person whose head is only two or three feet above the ground than to one whose head is five  or six feet above it. Older children and adults often try to retrieve the names of things they saw,  but infants would not have encoded the information verbally. General knowledge of categories of  events such as a birthday party or a visit to the doctor's office helps older individuals encode their  experiences, but again, infants and toddlers are unlikely to encode many experiences within such  knowledge structures. 
1. encode: transfer information from one system of communication into another 
26. The word "perspective" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A.  system 
B.  theory 
C.  source 
D.  viewpoint 
27. According to paragraphs 5 and 6, one disadvantage very young children face in processing 
information is that they cannot 
A.  process a lot of information at one time 
B.  organize experiences according to type 
C.  block out interruptions 
D.  interpret the tone of adult language .
These three explanations of infantile amnesia are not mutually exclusive; indeed, they  support each other. Physiological immaturity may be part of why infants and toddlers do not form  extremely enduring memories, even when they hear stories that promote such remembering in  preschoolers. Hearing the stories may lead preschoolers to encode aspects of events that allow  them to form memories they can access as adults. Conversely, improved encoding of what they  hear may help them better understand and remember stories and thus make the stories more  useful for remembering future events. Thus, all three explanations-physiological maturation,  hearing and producing stories about past events, and improved encoding of key aspects of  events-seem likely to be involved in overcoming infantile amnesia. 
28. How does paragraph 7 relate to the earlier discussion of infantile amnesia? 
A.  It introduces a new theory about the causes of infantile amnesia. 
B.  It argues that particular theories discussed earlier in the passage require further research. 
C.  It explains how particular theories discussed earlier in the passage may work in combination. 
D.  It evaluates which of the theories discussed earlier is most likely to be true. 
What do you remember about your life before you were three? (A) Few people can remember  anything that happened to them in their early years. (B) Adults' memories of the next few years  also tend to be scanty. (C) Most people remember only a few events-usually ones that were  meaningful and distinctive, such as being hospitalized or a sibling's birth. {D)  
29. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (B}, (C), and {D)  indicate where the following sentence could be added.  Other important occa sions are school graduation s and wedding s.  Where would the sentence best fit? 
A.  Choice A 
B.  Choice B
C.  Choice C
D.  Choice D
30. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below.  Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most  important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they  express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage.  Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of  your answer choice or you can copy the sentence.  There are several possible explanations why people cannot easily remember their  early childhoods .
Answer Choices 
[A] Preschoolers typically do not recall events from their first year. 
[B] Frontal lobe function of the brain may need to develop before memory retrieval can occur. 
[C] Children recall physical activities more easily if they are verbalized. 
[D] The opportunity to hear chronologically narrated stories may help three-year-old  children produce long-lasting memories. 
[E] The content of a memory determines the way in which it is encoded. 
[F] The contrasting ways in which young children and adults process information may  determine their relative success in remembering.
LISTENING
This section measures your ability to understand conversations and lectures in English. 
Listen to each conversation and lecture only one time. After each conversation and lecture, you  will answer some questions about it. Answer each question based on what is stated or implied by  the speakers. 
You may take notes while you listen and use your notes to help you answer the questions. Your  notes will not be scored. 
In some questions, you will see this icon: 0 This means that you will hear, but not see, the question. 
Answer each question before moving on. Do not return to previous questions. 
It will take about 41 minutes to listen to the conversations and lectures and answer the questions  about them.
Directions: Listen to Track 34. 0 
Directions: Now answer the questions.
1. Why does the student go to the career services office? 
A.  To confirm the date and time of the career fair 
B.  To learn the location of the career fair 
C.  To find out if he is allowed to attend the career fair 
D.  To get advice about interviewing at the career fair 
2. Why does the student think that companies' representatives would not be interested in talking to him?
A.  He will not be graduating this year. 
B.  He is not currently taking business classes. 
C.  He has not declared a major yet. 
D.  He does not have a current resume. 
3. What does the woman imply about the small print on the career fair posters and flyers? 
A.  The information in the small print was incomplete. 
B.  The print was smaller than she expected it to be. 
C.  The information the small print contains will be updated. 
D.  The information in the small print will be presented in a more noticeable way. 
4. What does the woman say is a good way for the student to prepare for speaking to companies' representatives? Choose 2 answers.
[A] Take some business classes
[B] Familiarize himself with certain businesses beforehand
[C] Have questions ready to ask the representatives
[D] Talk to people who work for accounting firms
5. Listen to Track 35. 0 
A.  To acknowledge that he cannot go to this year's career fair 
B.  To acknowledge the amount of preparation he will have 
C.  To indicate that he has school work he must complete before the career fair 
D.  To indicate that he needs to go to his job now
Directions: Listen to Track 36. 0
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
6. What topics related to the Nightcap Oak does the professor mainly discuss? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] Factors that relate to the size of the area in which it grows 
[B] The size of its population over the last few centuries 
[C] Whether anything can be done to ensure its survival 
[D] Why it did not change much over the last one hundred million years 
7. According to the professor, what led scientists to characterize the Nightcap Oak as primitive? 
A.  It has no evolutionary connection to other trees growing in Australia today. 
B.  It has an inefficient reproductive system. 
C.  Its flowers are located at the bases of the leaves. 
D.  It is similar to some ancient fossils.
8. What point does the professor make about the Nightcap Oak's habitat? 
A.  It is stable despite its limited size. 
B.  Unlike the habitats of many plants, it is expanding. 
C.  Its recent changes have left the Nightcap Oak struggling to adapt. 
D.  Its size is much larger than the area where the Nightcap Oak grows. 
9. According to the professor, what are two factors that prevent the Nightcap Oak population 
from spreading? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] The complex conditions required for the trees to produce fruit 
[B] The fact that the seed cannot germinate while locked inside the shell 
[C] The limited time the seed retains the ability to germinate 
[D] Competition with tree species that evolved more recently 
10. Why does the professor mention the size of the Nightcap Oak population over the last few  hundred years? 
A. To explain why it is likely that the Nightcap Oak population will increase in the future 
B. To point out that the Nightcap Oak's limited reproductive success has not led to a  decrease in its population 
C. To present evidence that the Nightcap Oak is able to tolerate major changes in its  environment 
C. To point out that the Nightcap Oak is able to resist diseases that have destroyed other  tree species 
11. Listen to Track 37. 0 
A.  She wants the students to think about a possible connection. 
B.  She wants to know if the students have any questions. 
C.  She is implying that researchers have been asking the wrong questions. 
D.  She is implying that there may be no connection between the questions. Directions: Listen to Track 38. 0 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
12. Why does the student go to see the professor? 
A.  She is having trouble finding a topic for her term paper. 
B.  She needs his help to find resource materials. 
C.  She wants to ask him for an extension on a term paper. 
D.  She wants him to approve her plans for a term paper. 
13. Why is the student interested in learning more about dialects? 
A.  She often has trouble understanding what other students are saying. 
B.  She is trying to change the way she speaks. 
C.  She is aware that her own dialect differs from those of her roommates. 
D.  She spent her childhood in various places where different dialects are spoken. 
14. Based on the conversation, what can be concluded about "dialect accommoda tion"?  Choose 2 answers. 
[A] It is a largely subconscious process. 
[B] It is a process that applies only to some dialects. 
[C] It is a very common phenomenon. 
[D] It is a topic that has not been explored extensively. 
15. What does the professor want the student to do next? 
A.  Read some articles he has recommended 
B.  Present her proposal before the entire class 
C.  Submit a design plan for the project 
D.  Listen to recordings of different dialects
16. Listen to Track 39. 0 
A.  He thinks the topic goes beyond his expertise. 
B.  He thinks the topic is too broad for the student to manage. 
C.  He thinks the topic is not relevant for a linguistics class. 
D.  He thinks other students may have chosen the same topic
Direction s: Listen to Track 40. 0 
Creative Writing 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
17. What aspect of creative writing does the professor mainly discuss? 
A. How to keep a reader's interest 
B. How to create believable characters 
C. Key differences between major and minor characters 
D. Techniques for developing short-story plots 
18. Why does the professor recommend that students pay attention to the people they see 
every day? 
A.  The behavior and characteristics of these people can be used in character sketches. 
B.  Observing people in real-life situations can provide ideas for story plots. 
C.  It is easier to observe the behavior of familiar people than of new people. 
D.  Students can gather accurate physical descriptions for their characters.
19. The professor discusses an example of three friends who run out of gas. What point does he 
use the example to illustrate? 
A.  Writers should know their characters as well as they know their friends. 
B.  Writers should create characters that interact in complex ways. 
C.  Friends do not always behave the way we expect them to behave. 
D.  Friends' behavior is often more predictable than fictional characters' behavior. 
20. What warning does the professor give when he talks about the man who lives on the mountain? 
A.  Avoid placing characters in remote settings 
B.  Avoid having more than one major character 
C.  Avoid using people as models whose lives are unusual 
D.  Avoid making characters into stereotypes 
21. What does the professor imply is the importance of flat characters? 
A.  They act more predictably than other characters. 
B.  They are difficult for readers to understand. 
C.  They help reveal the main character's personality. 
D.  They are the only characters able to experience defeat. 
22. Listen to Track 41. 0 
A.  To indicate that he is about to explain what type of drawing he wants 
B.  To help students understand a term that may be confusing 
C.  To indicate that he used the wrong word earlier 
D.  To motivate the students to do better work
Directions: Listen to Track 42. 0 
Earth Science Dire ctions: Now answer the questions. 
23. What is the lecture mainly about? 
A.  An example of rapid climate change 
B.  A comparison of two mechanisms of climate change 
C.  The weather conditions in the present-day Sahara 
D.  Recent geological findings made in the Sahara 
24. Not long ago, the Sahara had a different climate. What evidence does the professor mention  to support this? Choose 3 answers. 
[A] Ancient pollen 
[B]] Bones from large animals 
[C] Rock paintings 
[D] Agriculture in ancient Egypt 
[E] Underground water 
25. In the lecture, what do the Ice Age and the creation of the Sahara Desert both illustrate about  past climate changes? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] That some climate changes benefitted the development of civilization 
[B] That some climate changes were not caused by human activity 
[C] That some climate changes were caused by a decrease of moisture in the atmosphere 
[D] That some climate changes were caused by changes in Earth's motion and position 
26. What started the runaway effect that led to the Sahara area of North Africa becoming a desert? 
A.  The prevailing winds became stronger. 
B.  The seasonal rains moved to a different area. 
C.  The vegetation started to die off in large areas. 
D.  The soil lost its ability to retain rainwater.
27. The professor mentions a theory that people migrating from the Sahara were important to  the developmen t of the Egyptian civilization. Which sentence best describes the professor's  attitude toward this theory? 
A.  It is exciting because it perfectly explains recent archaeological discoveries. 
B.  It is problema tic because it goes too far beyond the generally available data. 
C.  It raises an interesting possibili ty and he hopes to see more evidence for it. 
D.  It cannot be taken seriously until it explains how the migrants got to Egypt. 
28. Listen to Track 43. 0 
A.  To correct a misstatement he made about the Sahara's climate 
B.  To suggest that the current dryness of the Sahara is exaggera ted 
C.  To indicate that scientists are not in agreemen t about the Sahara's past climate 
D.  To emphasize the difference between the current and past climates of the Sahara
SPEAKING
This section measures your ability to speak in English about a variety of topics. 
There are four questions in this section. For each question, you will be given a short time to prepare  your response. When the preparation time is up, answer the question as completely as possible  in the time indicated for that question. You should record your responses so that you can review  them later and compare them with the notes in the Answers section and scoring rubrics.
1. You will now be asked to give your opinion about a familiar topic. Give yourself 15 seconds to  prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 45 seconds. 
Listen to Track 44. 0 
Some people have one career throughout their lives. Other people do different kinds of  work at different points in their lives. Which do you think is better? Explain why. 
Preparation Time: 15 seconds 
Response Time: 45 seconds 
2. You will now read a short passage and listen to a conversation on the same topic. You will  then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds  to prepare your response. 
Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds.
Listen to Track 45. 0
Reading Time: 50 seconds 
Histor y Seminars Should Be Shorter 
Currently, all of the seminar classes in the history department are three hours long. I  would like to propose that history seminars be shortened to two hours. I make this proposal  for two reasons. First, most students just cannot concentrate for three hours straight. I  myself have taken these three-hour seminars and found them tiring and sometimes boring.  Also, when a seminar lasts that long, people stop concentrating and stop learning, so the  third hour of a three-hour seminar is a waste of everyone's time. Two-hour seminars would  be much more efficient.  Sincerely, 
Tim Lawson Listen to Track 46. 0
The woman expresses her opinion about the proposal described in the letter. Briefly  summarize the proposal. Then state her opinion about the proposal and explain the reasons  she gives for holding that opinion.  
Preparation Time : 30 seconds 
Response Time : 60 seconds 
3. You will now read a short passage and listen to a lecture on the same topic. You will then  be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to  prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 47. 0 
Reading Time : 45 seconds 
Explicit Memories and Implicit Memories 
In everyday life, when people speak of memory , they are almost always speaking  about what psychologists would call explicit memories. An explicit memory is a conscious  or intentional recollection, usually of facts, names, events, or other things that a person  can state or declare. There is another kind of memory that is not conscious. Memories of  this kind are called implicit memories. An individual can have an experience that he or she  cannot consciously recall yet still display reactions that indicate the experience has been  somehow recorded in his or her brain.
Listen to Track 48. 0 
Using the example of the car advertisement, explain what is meant by implicit memory. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds 
4. You will now listen to part of a lecture. You will then be asked a question about it. After you  hear the question, give yourself 20 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself  speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 49. 0 
Using points and examples from the talk, explain the difference between active and passive  attention. 
Preparat ion Time: 20 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds
WRITING
This section measures your ability to write in English to communicate in an academic environment. 
There are two writing questions in this section. 
For question 1, you will read a passage and listen to a lecture about the same topic. You may take  notes while you read and listen. Then you will write a response to a question based on what you  have read and heard. You may look back at the passage when answering the question. You may use  your notes to help you answer the question. You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. 
For question 2, you will write an essay based on your own knowledge and experience. You have 30  minutes to plan and complete your essay.
1. Directions: Give yourself 3 minutes to read the passage. 
Reading Time: 3 minutes 
Communal on line encyclopedias represent one of the latest resources to be found on the  Internet. They are in many respects like traditional printed encyclopedias: collections of articles  on various subjects. What is specific to these online encyclopedias, however, is that any Internet  user can contribute a new article or make an editorial change in an existing one. As a result,  the ency clopedia is authored by the whole community of Internet users. The idea might sound  attractive, but the communal online encyclopedias have several important problems that make  them much less valuable than traditional, printed encyclopedias. 
First, contributors to a communal online encyclopedia often lack academic credentials,  thereby making their contributions partially informed at best and downright inaccurate in many  cases. Traditional encyclopedias are written by trained experts who adhere to standards of  academic rigor that nonspeci alists cannot really achieve. 
Second, even if the original entry in the on line encyclopedia is correct, the communal nature  of these online encyclopedias gives unscrupulous users and vandals or hackers the opportunity  to fabricate, delete, and corrupt informati on in the encyclopedia. Once changes have been  made to the original text, an unsuspecting user cannot tell the entry has been tampered with.  None of this is possible with a traditional encyclopedia. 
Third, the communal encyclopedias focus too frequently, and in too great a depth, on trivial  and popular topics, which creates a false impression of what is important and what is not. A  child doing research for a school project may discover that a major historical event receives as  much attention in an on line encyclopedia as, say, a single long-running television program. The  traditional encyclopedia provides a considered view of what topics to include or exclude and  contains a sense of proportion that on line "democratic" communal encyclopedias do not. 
Listen to Track 50. 0
Writing 
Directions: You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response, Your response will be judged on the  basis of the quality of your writing and on how well your response presents the points in the lecture  and their relationship to the reading passage. Typically, an effective response will be 150 to 225 words.  
Listen to Track 51. 0 
Response Time : 20 minutes 
Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they oppose the specific  points made in the reading passage,
2. Directions: Read the question below. You have 30 minutes to plan, write, and revise your  essay. Typically, an effective response will contain a minimum of 300 words. 
Response Time: 30 minutes 
Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? 
Life today is easier and more comfortable than it was when your grandparents were  children. 
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. Be sure to use your own words. Do not 
use memori zed examples. 
ANSWERS
Reading Section 
1. D 16. D 
2. B 17. B, C 
3. B 18. B 
4. A 19. C 
5. A 20. B, C, F 
6. C 21. C 
7. C 22. C 
8. B 23. D 
9. C 24. B 
10. B, C, F 25. D 
11. C 26. D 
12. C 27. B 
13. A 28. C 
14. B 29. D 
15. D 30. B, D, F 
Listening Section 
1. c 15. C 
2. A 16. B 
3. D 17. B 
4. B,C 18. A 
5. B 19. A 
6. A,B 20. D 
7. D 21. C 
8. D 22. B 
9. B,C 23. A 
10. B 24. A, C, E 
11. A 25. B, D 
12. D 26. B 
13. C 27. C 
14. A,C 28. D .
Speak ing Section 
1. To respond to this particular question, you  should clearly state what your opinion is: do  you think it is better to have one career or do  different kinds of work? You should then give  reasons to support your opinion. If you think  that it is better to have one career, you could  say that if you have a career that you love, there  is no reason to change. Many people enjoy  doing one thing that they are very good at. You  may then talk about other advantages, such as  money or the possibility to advance over time.  You may give a more specific example to help  you explain. For example, you could say that a  doctor has gone to school for a long time and it  takes a long time to learn to be a good doctor,  so in this case changing careers would not make  sense. 
If you think it is better to do different kinds  of work, you would develop your opinion in a  similar way. You could say that doing one job for  your whole life would not be interesting, and  that as technology progresses, many new fields  to work in become available. You might then  provide specific information about new fields,  such as those connected to new computer  technology. 
It is important to understand that there  is no "correct" answer to this question.  Whichever option you prefer, your answer  should be supported with examples. It is  important to make sure that you state your  opinion and develop your response with good  examples and relevant details.  Your response should be intelligible, should  demonstrate effective use of grammar and  vocabula ry, and should be well developed and  coherent. Your response is scored using the  Independent Speaking Rubric (see Appendix A). 
2. To respond to this particular question, you  should state the woman's opinion of the letter  writer's proposal to shorten history seminars to  two hours. In this case, the woman disagrees  with the letter writer's proposal. After stating that the woman disagrees  with the proposal, you should convey the  two main reasons she gives for holdi ng that  opinion. You will need to connect information  from the conversation to the reading in order  for the response to be complete. The woman  says that the first reason given for shortening  history seminars-that students cannot  concentrate for three hours-isn't valid. She  says that Tim, the letter writer, is not a typical  student and that he stays up late at night, and  sometimes even sleeps in class. 
Your response should also convey the  woman's second reason for not agreeing with  the letter writer's proposal. The letter writer  thinks that the third hour of the seminar is  a waste of time because people don't learn  anything. The woman thinks, however , that the  last hour is when the discussions are the most  interesting and that it is the most important  part of the seminar. 
Your response should be intelligible, should  demonstrate effective use of grammar and  vocabulary , and should be well developed and  coherent. Your response is scored using the  Integrated Speaking Rubric (see Appendix A). 
3. To respond to this particular question  you should first explain the idea of implicit  memory as it was presented in the reading. An  implicit memory is not conscious and cannot  be recalled, but it is recorded in our brains.  You may choose to contrast this with explicit  memory , which is consciously recalled. However ,  do not spend too much time at this stage. You  must give yourself enough time to discuss the  professor's example. 
You should then use the example given by  the professor to explain implicit memory. In  the example, implicit memory is demonstrated  when a person drives by a billboard and sees an  advertisement for a car called "Panther" but has  no recollection of the billboard. Then later, the  same person recalls the word "Panther" when asked to name an animal that starts with the  letter "P," even though "pig" is a more common  animal that begins with "p." This shows that  the billboard has had an effect on the person's  mem ory; this is an illustration of implicit  memor y. 
You do not need to repeat all of the details  from the reading and the lecture, but instead  integ rate points from both to answer the  question completely . 
Your response should be intelligible, should  dem onstr ate effective use of grammar and  vocabular y, and should be well developed and  coherent. Your response is scored using the  Integrated Speaking Rubric (see Appendix A).  4. This particular question requires you to  summar ize the contents of a lecture you hear .  In yo ur response, you should talk about the two  different kinds of attent ion that the professor  describes.  
The order in which you discuss the two  types of attention is not important as long as  you discuss both types fully and mak e clear  what is different about them. The professor  says that active attenti on is volu ntary; it occurs  when people force thems elves to pay attention  to some thing. A boring lecture about frogs will  require students to pay active attention, but  they will not be able to main tain their attention  for long. 
You would then talk about passive  attention. Passive attent ion is involuntary and  requires no effort to main tain, unlik e active  attention, which does require effort; it occurs when people are natur ally inter ested in the  mater ial. If a teacher pulls out a live frog, the  students become mor e inter ested and passive  attention is main tained. 
You should budge t your time so that you  are able to include a good sum mary of both  types of attention and talk about both example s in the lecture. 
Your response should be intel ligib le, should  demo nstrate effective use of grammar and  vocabular y, and shou ld be well developed and  coherent. Your response is scored using the  Integrated Speaking Rubr ic (see Appendix A). 
Writing Section 
1. What is important to understand from the  lecture is that the professor disagr ees with the  criticisms of communal on line ency clop edias  presented in the readin g, namely that the  ency clopedias contain inaccurate information;  that unscrupulous users can tamper with the  information in the encyclopedias; and that the  ency clopedias do not distinguish important  topics from unimp ortant ones. 
In your respon se, you should convey the  reasons presented by the professor for why the  criticisms of communal on line ency clop edias  are not convincing. A high-sc oring response  will include the following points made by the  professor that cast doub t on the points made  in the read ing: Point made in the reading  Since entries in communal onlin e ency clopedias are  not always written by experts, they can be inaccur ate  and unreliable. 
Because anyone can make revisions to the content of  online ency clopedias , unscrupulous users, vandals,  and hack ers can inten tionally corrupt the content of  articles in the encycloped ias. 
Communal online encyclopedias often give equal  space to articles on trivial topics and articles on  serious topics. This creates a false impression about  which information is important and which is not.  Your response is scored using the Integrated 
Writing Rubric (see Appendix A). A response that  receives a score of 5 clearly conveys all three  of the main points in the table using accur ate  sentence structure and vocabulary. 
2. To earn a top score, you should deve lop a  multi-paragraph essay that responds to the issue  of whether life is easier and more comforta ble  now than when your gr andp arents were children.  Typically an effective response will conta in a  minimum of 300 words. 
One successfu l way to expr ess agreement  with the promp t is to describe how  developmen ts in a particular field have helped  to make life easier . Descri bing how work in the  hous ehold has become so much easier as a  result of the availability of electronic appliances  could be one way to develop such a response;  you could explain how these machine s save  time on doing household tasks that years ago  took many hour s or even days to comple te, and Counterpoint made in the lecture  No encycloped ia is perfectly accur ate. What really  matters is how easily and quickly the mistakes can  be corrected. In this regard, online encyclopedias are  better than the traditional ones, because inaccur ate  content in online encyclopedias can be revised much  faster. 
Onlin e encyclopedias have taken steps to protect  their content from unscrupulous users, vandals, and  hack ers. Some important content is presented in  a "read-only" format that cannot be revised. Al so,  special editors now monitor changes made to articles  and elimin ate re visions that are malicious.  
The fact that on line encyclopedias conta in  informat ion on all kinds of sub jects is not a weakness  but a strength. Diversity of topics covered by  on line encycloped ias is a true reflection of the  diversity of people's interests. In contrast, traditional  encyclopedias have limited space, and editors who  choose which entries to include do not always take  diverse interests into account.  conclude that life is much easier now beca use  we have more free time. 
On the other hand, you could disagree with  the prompt by ex plaining that life was more  comforta ble when your grandpar ents were  childr en. For exam ple, it may be the case that  when your gr andparents were childr en, the air  and water were clean er, food was fresher, and  some types of jobs were less stressful; you could  discuss the importance of any of those in support  of your opinion. 
Keep in min d that there is no "correct"  answer to this question. Either side of the issue  can be supp orted with examples and reasons.  It is important to make sure that you state your  opinion and develop a response that explains  your opinion well. The develop ment of your  essay is judged by how effectiv ely you supp ort  your opin ion; a well-developed essay will  conta in clearly appropriate reasons, examples,  and details that illustrate your opinion. Developmen t is not evaluated simply in terms of  how many words you write. 
Your response should be well organized. 
A well-organ ized essay allows an evaluator to  read from the beginning to the end of the essay  without becoming confused. You should be  sure not to just repeat the same information in  different ways.
The quality and accu racy of the sentence  structure and voca bular y you use to express your ideas is also very important.  Your response is scored using the  Independen t Writing Rubric (see Appendix A). 