READING
This section measures your ability to understand academic passages in English.
There are three passages in the section. Give yourself 18 minutes to read each passage and answer the questions about it. The entire section will take 54 minutes to complete. 
You may look back at a passage when answering the questions . You can skip questions and go back to them later as long as there is time remaining. ; ,. 
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set.
HABITATS AND CHIPMUNK SPECIES
There are eight chipmunk species in the Sierra Nevada mountain range, and most of them look pretty much alike. But eight different species of chipmunks scurrying around a picnic area will not be found. Nowhere in the Sierra do all eight species occur together. Each species tends strongly to occupy a specific habitat type, within an elevational range, and the overlap among them is minimal.
The eight chipmunk species of the Sierra Nevada represent but a few of the 15 species found in western North America, yet the whole of eastern North America makes do with but one species: the Eastern chipmunk. Why are there so many very similar chipmunks in the West? The presence of tall mountains interspersed with vast areas of arid desert and grassland makes the West ecologically far different from the East. The West affords much more opportunity for chipmunk populations to become geographically isolated from one another, a condition of species formation. Also, there are more extremes in western habitats. In the Sierra Nevada, high elevations are close to low elevations, at least in terms of mileage, but ecologically they are very different. 
Most ecologists believe that ancient populations of chipmunks diverged genetical ly when isolated from one another by mountains and unfavorable ecological habitat. These scattered populations first evolved into races-adapted to the local ecological conditions-and then into species, reproductively isolated from one another. This period of evolution was relatively recent, as evidenced by the similar appearance of all the western chipmunk species. 
Ecologists have studied the four chipmunk species that occur on the eastern slope of the Sierra and have learned just how these species interact while remaining separate, each occupying its own elevational zone. The sagebrush chipmunk is found at the lowest elevation, among the sagebrush. The yellow pine chipmunk is common in low to mid-elevations and open conifer forests, including pirion and ponderosa and Jeffrey pine forests. The lodgepole chipmunk is found at higher elevations, among the lodgepoles, firs, and high-elevation pines. The alpine chipmunk is higher still, venturing among the talus slopes, alpine meadows, and high-elevation pines and junipers. Obviously, the ranges of each species overlap. Why don't sagebrush chipmunks move into the pine zones? Why don't alpine chipmunks move to lower elevations and share the conifer forests with lodgepole chipmunks? 
The answer, in one word, is aggression. Chipmu nk species actively defend their ecologica l zones from encroachm ent by neighboring species. The yellow pine chipmunk is more aggressive than the sagebrush chipmunk, possibly because it is a bit larger. It successfully bullies its smaller evolutionary cousin, excluding it from the pine forests. Experiments have shown that the sagebrush chipmunk is physiologically able to live anywhere in the Sierra Nevada, from high alpine zones to the desert. The little creature is apparently restricted to the desert not because it is specialized to live only there but because that is the only habitat where none of the other chipmunk species can live. The fact that sagebrush chipmunks tolerate very warm temperatures makes them, and only them, able to live where they do. The sagebrush chipmunk essentially occupies its habitat by default. In one study, ecologists established that yellow pine chipmunks actively exclude sagebrush chipmunks from pine forests; the ecologists simply trapped all the yellow pine chipmunks in a section of forest and moved them out. Sagebrush chipmunks immediately moved in, but yellow pine chipmunks did not enter sagebrush desert when sagebrush chipmunks were removed. 
The most aggressive of the four eastern-slope species is the lodgepole chipmunk, a feisty rodent indeed. It actively prevents alpine chipmunks from moving downslope, and yellow pine chipmunks from moving upslope. There is logic behind the lodgepole's aggressive demeanor. It lives in the cool, shaded conifer forests, and of the four species, it is the least able to tolerate heat stress. It is, in other words, the species of the strictest habitat needs: it simply must be in those shaded forests. However, if it shared its habitat with alpine and yellow pine chipmunks, either or both of these species might outcomp ete it, taking most of the available food. Such a competition could effectively eliminate lodgepole chipmunks from the habitat. Lodgepoles survive only by virtue of their aggression. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
The eight chipmunk species of the Sierra Nevada represent but a few of the 15 species found in western North America, yet the whole of eastern North America makes do with but one species: the Eastern chipmunk. Why are there so many very similar chipmunks in the West? The presence of tall mountains interspersed with vast areas of arid desert and grassland makes the West ecologically far different from the East. The West affords much more opportu nity for chipmunk populations to become geographica lly isolated from one another, a condition of species formatio n. Also, there are more extremes in western habitats. In the Sierra Nevada, high elevations are close to low elevations, at least in terms of mileage, but ecologically they are very different. 
1. In paragraph 2, the author indicates that a large variety of chipmunk species exist in western North America because of 
A. a large migratio n of chipmunks from eastern North America in an earlier period 
B. the inability of chipmunks to adapt to the high mountainous regions of eastern North America 
C. the ecological variety and extremes of the West that caused chipmunks to become geographica lly isolated 
D. the absence of large human populations that discourag ed species formatio n among chipmunks in the East p R A 
Most ecologists believe that ancient populations of chipmunks diverged genetically when isolated from one another by mountains and unfavorable ecological habitat. These scattered populations first evolved into races-adapted to the local ecological condition s-and then into species, reproductively isolated from one another. This period of evolution was relatively recent, as evidenced by the similar appearance of all the western chipmunk species. 
2. The word "diverged" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. declined 
B. competed
C. progressed 
D. separated 
Ecologists have studied the four chipmunk species that occur on the eastern slope of the Sierra and have learned just how these species interact while remaining separate, each occupying its own elevational zone. The sagebrush chipmunk is found at the lowest elevation, among the sagebrush. 
The yellow pine chipmunk is common in low to mid-elevations and open conifer forests, including pinon and ponderosa and Jeffrey pine forests. The lodgepole chipmunk is found at higher elevations, among the lodgepoles, firs, and high-elevation pines. The alpine chipmunk is higher still, venturing among the talus slopes, alpine meadows, and high-elevation pines and junipers. 
Obviously, the ranges of each species overlap. Why don't sagebrush chipmunks move into the pine zones? Why don't alpine chipmunks move to lower elevations and share the conifer forests with lodgepole chipmunks? 
3. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essentia l information in the highlighted sentence in paragraph 4? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A. Ecologists studied how the geographic characteristics of the eastern slope of the Sierra influenced the social development of chipmunks. 
B. Ecologists learned exactly how chipmunk species separated from each other on the eastern slope of the Sierra relate to one another. 
C. Ecologists discovered that chipmunks of the eastern slope of the Sierra invade and occupy higher elevational zones when threatened by another species. 
D. Ecologists studied how individual chipmunks of the eastern slope of the Sierra avoid interacting with others of their species. 
4. Where does paragraph 4 indicate that the yellow pine chipmunk can be found in relationship to the other species of the eastern slope of the Sierra? 
A. Below the sagebrush chipmunk 
B. Above the alpine chipmunk 
C. At the same elevation as the sagebrush chipmunk 
D. Below the lodgepole chipmunk
The answer, in one word, is aggression. Chipmunk species actively defend their ecological zones from encroachment by neighboring species. The yellow pine chipmunk is more aggressive than the sagebrush chipmunk, possibly because it is a bit larger. It successfully bullies its smaller evolutionary cousin, excluding it from the pine forests. Experiments have shown that the sagebrush chipmunk is physiologically able to live anywhere in the Sierra Nevada, from high alpine zones to the desert. The little creature is apparently restricted to the desert not because it is specialized to live only there but because that is the only habitat where none of the other chipmunk species can live. The fact that sagebrush chipmunks tolerate very warm temperatures makes them, and only them, able to live where they do. The sagebrush chipmunk essentially occupies its habitat by default. In one study, ecologists established that yellow pine chipmunks actively exclude sagebrush chipmunks from pine forests; the ecologists simply trapped all the yellow pine chipmunks in a section of forest and moved them out. Sagebrush chipmunks immediately moved in, but yellow pine chipmunks did not enter sagebrush desert when sagebrush chipmunks were removed. 
5. The word "encroachment" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. complete destruction 
B. gradual invasion 
C. excessive development 
D. substitution 
6. Paragraph 5 mentions all of the following as true of the relationship of sagebrush chipmunks to their habitats EXCEPT: 
A. Sagebrush chipmunks are able to survive in any habitat of the Sierra Nevada. 
B. Sagebrush chipmunks occupy their habitat because of the absence of competition from other chipmunks. 
C. Sagebrush chipmunks are better able to survive in hot temperatures than other species of chipmunks. 
D. Sagebrush chipmunks spend the warm season at the higher elevations of the alpine zone. 
7. Which of the following statements is supported by the results of the experiment described at the end of paragraph 5? 
A. The habitat of the yellow pine chipmunk is a desirable one to other species, but the habitat of the sagebrush chipmunk is not. 
B. It was more difficult to remove sagebrush chipmunks from their habitat than it was to remove yellow pine chipmunks from theirs. 
C. Yellow pine chipmunks and sagebrush chipmunks require the same environmental conditions in their habitats. 
D. The temperature of the habitat is not an important factor to either the yellow pine chipmunk or the sagebrush chipmunk. 
The most aggressive of the four eastern-slope species is the lodgepole chipmunk, a feisty rodent indeed. It actively prevents alpine chipmunks from moving downslope, and yellow pine chipmunks from moving upslope. There is logic behind the lodgepole's aggressive demeanor. It lives in the cool, shaded conifer forests, and of the four species, it is the least able to tolerate heat stress. It is, in other words, the species of the strictest habitat needs: it simply must be in those shaded forests. However, if it shared its habitat with alpine and yellow pine chipmunks, either or both of these species might outcompete it, taking most of the available food. Such a competition could effectively eliminate lodgepole chipmunks from the habitat. Lodgepoles survive only by virtue of their aggression. 
8. According to paragraph 6, why is the lodgepole chipmunk so protective of its habitat from competing chipmunks? 
A. It has specialized food requirements. 
B. It cannot tolerate cold temperatures well. 
C. It requires the shade provided by forest trees. 
D. It prefers to be able to move between areas that are downslope and upslope. 
Ecologists have studied the four chipmunk species that occur on the eastern slope of the Sierra and have learned just how these species interact while remaining separate, each occupying its own elevational zone. The sagebrush chipmunk is found at the lowest elevation, among the sagebrush. 
The yellow pine chipmunk is common in low to mid-elevations and open conifer forests, including pinon and ponderosa and Jeffrey pine forests. The lodgepole chipmunk is found at higher elevations, among the lodgepoles, firs, and high-elevation pines. The alpine chipmunk is higher still, venturing among the talus slopes, alpine meadows, and high-elevation pines and junipers. (A) Obviously, the ranges of each species overlap. (B) Why don't sagebrush chipmunks move into the pine zones? (C) Why don't alpine chipmunks move to lower elevations and share the conifer forests with lodgepole chipmunks? (0) 
9. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A}, (8), (C), and (0) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
Yet each species remains within a fairly well-defined elevational zone. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C
D. ChoiceD 
10. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. 
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
A varie ty of chipmunk species inhabit western North America . 
Answer Choices 
[A] Ecological variation of the Sierra Nevada resulted in the differentiation of chipmunk species. 
[B] Only one species of chipmunk inhabits eastern North America. 
[C] Although some chipmunk species of the Sierra Nevada have the ability to live at various elevations, each species inhabits a specifically restricted one. 
[D] Chipmunks aggressively defend their habitats from invasion by other species of chipmunks. 
[E] Experimental studies indicate that sagebrush chipmunks live in the desert because of their physiological requirements. 
[F] The most aggressive of the chipmunk species is the lodgepole chipmunk. 
Directions: Read the passage. 
Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 

CETACEAN INTELLIGENCE 
We often hear that whales, dolphins, and porpoises are as intelligent as humans, maybe even more so. Are they really that smart? There is no question that cetaceans are among the most intelligent of animals. Dolphins, killer whales, and pilot whales in captivity quickly learn tricks. The military has trained bottlenose dolphins to find bombs and missile heads and to work as underwater spies. 
This type of learning, however, is called conditioning. The animal simply learns that when it performs a particular behavior, it gets a reward, usually a fish. Many animals, including rats, birds, and even invertebrates, can be conditioned to perform tricks. We certainly don't think of these animals as our mental rivals. Unlike most other animals, however, dolphins quickly learn by observations and may spontaneously imitate human activities. One tame dolphin watched a diver cleaning an underwater viewing window, seized a feather in its beak, and began imitating the diver-complete with sound effects! Dolphins have also been seen imitating seals, turtles, and even water-skiers. 
Given the seeming intelligence of cetaceans, people are always tempted to compare them with humans and other animals. Studies on discrimination and problem- solving skills in the bottlenose dolphin, for instance, have concluded that its intelligence lies "somewhere between that of a dog and a chimpanzee." Such comparisons are unfair. It is important to realize that intelligence is a very human concept and that we evaluate it in human terms. After all, not many people would consider themselves stupid because they couldn't locate and identify a fish by its echo. Why should we judge cetaceans by their ability to solve human problems? 
Both humans and cetaceans have large brains with an expanded and distinctively folded surface, the cortex. The cortex is the dominant association center of the brain, where abilities such as memory and sensory perception are centered. Cetaceans have larger brains than ours, but the ratio of brain to body weight is higher in humans. Again, direct comparisons are misleading. In cetaceans it is mainly the portions of the brain associated with hearing and the processing of sound information that are expanded. The enlarged portions of our brain deal largely with vision and hand-eye coordination. Cetaceans and humans almost certainly perceive the world in very different ways. Their world is largely one of sounds, ours one of sights. 
Contrary to what is depicted in movies and on television, the notion of "talking" to dolphins is also misleading. Although they produce a rich repertoire of complex sounds, they lack vocal cords and their brains probably process sound differently from ours. Bottlenose dolphins have been trained to make sounds through the blowhole that sound something like human sounds, but this is a far cry from human speech. By the same token, humans cannot make whale sounds. We will probably never be able to carry on an unaided conversation with cetaceans. 
As in chimpanzees, captive bottlenose dolphins have been taught American Sign Language. These dolphins have learned to communicate with trainers who use sign language to ask simple questions. Dolphins answer back by pushing a "yes" or "no" paddle. They have even been known to give spontaneous responses not taught by the trainers. Evidence also indicates that these dolphins can distinguish between commands that differ from each other only by their word order, a truly remarkable achievement. Nevertheless, dolphins do not seem to have a real language like ours. Unlike humans, dolphins probably cannot convey very complex messages. 
Observations of cetaceans in the wild have provided some insights on their learning abilities. Several bottlenose dolphins off western Australia , for instance , have been observed carrying large cone-shaped sponges over their beaks. They supposedly use the sponges for protection against stingrays and other hazards on the bottom as they search for fish to eat. This is the first record of the use of tools among wild cetaceans. 
Instead of "intelligence ," some people prefer to speak of "awareness." In any case, cetaceans probably have a very different awareness and perception of their environment than do humans. Maybe one day we will come to understand cetaceans on their terms instead of ours, and perhaps we will discover a mental sophistication rivaling our own. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
This type of learning , however , is called conditioning. The animal simply learns that when it performs a particular behavior , it gets a reward, usually a fish. Many animals, including rats, birds, and even invertebrates , can be conditioned to perform tricks. We certainly don't think of these animals as our mental rivals. Unlike most other animals, however , dolphins quickly learn by observations and may spontaneously imitate human activities. One tame dolphin watched a diver cleaning an underwater viewing window, seized a feather in its beak, and began imitating the diver-complete with sound effects! Dolphins have also been seen imitating seals, turtles, and even water-skiers. 
11. According to the passage, which of the following animals is most likely to learn by watching another animal perform an activity? 
A. Rats 
B. Birds 
C. Invertebrates 
D. Dolphins 
Given the seeming intelligence of cetaceans , people are always tempted to compare them with humans and other animals. Studies on discriminati on and problem-solving skills in the bottlenose dolphin, for instance , have concluded that its intelligence lies "somewhe re between that of a dog and a chimpanzee." Such comparisons are unfair. It is important to realize that intelligence is a very human concept and that we evaluate it in human terms. After all, not many people would consider themselves stupid because they couldn't locate and identify a fish by its echo. Why should we judge cetaceans by their ability to solve human problems? 
12. The word "tempted" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. conditioned 
B. reluctant 
C. inclined 
D. invited
13. According to the passage, why are the studies that conclude that dolphin intelligence is "'somewhere between that of a dog and a chimpanzee'" not correct? 
A. The human method of drawing comparisons is not relevant to animal intelligence. 
B. Dolphins have actually been shown to be much more intelligent than chimpanzees. 
C. The studies were not conducted according to standard research methods. 
D. Dolphins do not typically demonstrate conditioned responses for humans to observe. 
Both humans and cetaceans have large brains with an expanded and distinctively folded surface, the cortex. The cortex is the dominant association center of the brain, where abilities such as memory and sensory perception are centered. Cetaceans have larger brains than ours, but the ratio of brain to body weight is higher in humans. Again, direct comparisons are misleading. In cetaceans it is mainly the portions of the brain associated with hearing and the processing of sound information that are expanded. The enlarged portions of our brain deal largely with vision and hand-eye coordination. Cetaceans and humans almost certainly perceive the world in very different ways. Their world is largely one of sounds, ours one of sights. 
14. The word "dominant" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. local 
B. natural 
C. chief 
D. specific
Observations of cetaceans in the wild have provided some insights on their learning abilities. 
Several bottlenose dolphins off western Australia, for instance, have been observed carrying large cone-shaped sponges over their beaks. They supposedly use the sponges for protection against stingrays and other hazards on the bottom as they search for fish to eat. This is the first record of the use of tools among wild cetaceans. 
15. The word "insights" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. examples 
B. understanding 
C. directions 
D. discussion 
16. Scientific observations show that cetaceans are able to do all of the following EXCEPT 
A. use natural objects as tools for self-protection 
B. produce complex sounds through their blowholes 
C. answer spoken questions 
D. distinguish between very similar spoken sentences 
17. The word "hazards" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. objects 
B. dangers 
C. species 
D. debris 
Instead of "intelligence," some people prefer to speak of "awareness. " In any case, cetaceans probably have a very different awareness and perception of their environment than do humans. Maybe one day we will come to understand cetaceans on their terms instead of ours, and perhaps we will discover a mental sophistication rivaling our own. 
18. What does the author conclude about the intelligence of cetaceans? 
A. It is not appropriate to judge cetacean intelligence in human terms. 
B. Cetaceans probably possess a mental sophistication that is as complex as that of humans. 
C. Although cetaceans may appear to be intelligent, they have fewer problem-solving skills than most animals. 
D. Their ability to learn American Sign Language indicates that cetaceans have a high level of intelligence. 
This type of learning, however, is called conditioning. (A) The animal simply learns that when it performs a particular behavior, it gets a reward, usually a fish. (8) Many animals, including rats, birds, and even invertebrates, can be conditioned to perform tricks. (C) We certainly don't think of these animals as our mental rivals. (D) Unlike most other animals, however, dolphins quickly learn by observations and may spontaneously imitate human activities. One tame dolphin watched a diver cleaning an underwater viewing window, seized a feather in its beak, and began imitating the diver-complete with sound effects! Dolphins have also been seen imitating seals, turtles, and even water-skiers. 
19. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters (A), (8), (C), and (D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
This reward is merely one poss ible type of positive reinforcement that leads to more frequent repet ition of the behav ior in the future. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C 
D. Choice D 

20. Directions: Select the appropriate phrases from the answer choices below and match them to the type of animal to which they relate. ONE of the answer choices will NOT be used. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
Humans but not Cetaceans 
BOTH Humans and Cetaceans 
Answer Choices
[A]A brain with a cortex 
[B] A set of voca I cords 
[C] The ability to use tools 
[D] The ability to locate objects by using echo 
[E] The ability to learn by observation 
Directions: Read the passage. Then answer the questions. Give yourself 18 minutes to complete this practice set. 
A MODEL OF URBAN EXPANSION 
In the early twentieth century, the science of sociology found supporters in the United States and Canada partly beca use the cities there were growing so rapidly. It often appeared that North American cities would be unable to absorb all the newcomers arriving in such large numbers. Presociological thinkers like Frederick Law Olmsted, the founder of the movement to build parks and recreation areas in cities, and Jacob Riis, an advocate of slum reform, urged the nation's leaders to invest in improving the urban environment, building parks and beaches, and making better housing available to all. These reform efforts were greatly aided by sociologists who conducted empirical research on the social conditions in cities. In the early twentieth century, many sociologists lived in cities like Chicago that were characterized by rapid population growth and serious social problems. It seemed logical to use empirical research to construct theories about how cities grow and change in response to major social forces as well as more controlled urban planning. 
The founders of the Chicago school of sociology, Robert Park and Ernest Burgess, attempted to develop a dynamic model of the city, one that would account not only for the expansion of cities in terms of population and territory but also for the patterns of settlement and land use within cities. They identified several factors that influence the physical form of cities. As Park stated, among them are "transportation and communication, tramways and telephones, newspapers and advertising, steel construction and elevators-all things, in fact, which tend to bring about at once a greater mobility and a greater concentration of the urban populations. " Park and Burgess based their model of urban growth on the concept of "natural areas"­that is, areas such as occupational suburbs or residentia l enclaves in which the population is relatively homogene ous and land is used in similar ways without deliberate planning. Park and Burgess saw urban expansion as occurring through a series of "invasions " of successive zones or areas surrounding the center of the city. For example, people from rural areas and other societies "invaded " areas where housing was inexpensive. Those areas tended to be close to the places p p where they worked. In turn, people who could afford better housing and the cost of commuting "invaded" areas farther from the business district. 
Park and Burgess's model has come to be known as the "concentric-zone model" (represented by the figure). Because the model was originally based on studies of Chicago, its center is labeled "Loop," the term commonly applied to that city's central commercial zone. Surrounding the central zone is a "zone in transition," an area that is being invaded by business and light manufacturing. The third zone is inhabited by workers who do not want to live in the factory or business district but at the same time need to live reasonably close to where they work. The fourth or residential zone consists of upscale apartment buildings and single-family homes. And the outermost ring, outside the city limits, is the suburban or commuters' zone; its residents live within a 30-to 60-minute ride of the central business district. 
Studies by Park, Burgess, and other Chicago-school sociologists showed how new groups of immigrants tended to be concentrated in separate areas within inner-city zones, where they sometimes experienced tension with other ethnic groups that had arrived earlier. Over time, however, each group was able to adjust to life in the city and to find a place for itself in the urban economy. Eventually many of the immigrants moved to unsegregated areas in outer zones; the areas they left behind were promptly occupied by new waves of immigrants. 
The Park and Burgess model of growth in zones and natural areas of the city can still be used to describe patterns of growth in cities that were built around a central business district and that continue to attract large numbers of immigrants. But this model is biased toward the commercial and industrial cities of North America, which have tended to form around business centers rather than around palaces or cathedrals, as is often the case in some other parts of the world. Moreover, it fails to account for other patterns of urbanization, such as the rapid urbanization that occurs along commercial transportation corridors and the rise of nearby satellite cities. 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
In the early twentieth century, the science of sociology found supporters in the United States and Canada partly because the cities there were growing so rapidly. It often appeared that North American cities would be unable to absorb all the newcomers arriving in such large numbers. 
Presociological thinkers like Frederick Law Olmsted, the founder of the movement to build parks and recreation areas in cities, and Jacob Riis, an advocate of slum reform, urged the nation's leaders to invest in improving the urban environment, building parks and beaches, and making better housing available to all. These reform efforts were greatly aided by sociologists who conducted empirical research on the social conditions in cities. In the early twentieth century, many sociologists lived in cities like Chicago that were characterized by rapid population growth and serious social problems. It seemed logical to use empirical research to construct theories about how cities grow and change in response to major social forces as well as more controlled urban planning. 
21. Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about what Olmsted and Riis had in common? 
A.  Both constructed theories based on empirical research on cities. 
B.  Both were among a large number of newcomers to North American cities. 
C.  Both wanted to improve the conditions of life in cities. 
D.  Both hoped to reduce the rapid growth of large cities.
22. Which of the following best states the relationship that Olmsted and Riis had to the study of sociology? 
A.  Their goals were supported by the research conducted later by sociologists. 
B.  Their approach led them to oppose empirical sociological studies. 
C.  They had difficulty establishing that their work was as important as sociological research. 
D.  They used evidence from sociological research to urge national leaders to invest in urban development. 
The founders of the Chicago school of sociology, Robert Park and Ernest Burgess, attempted to develop a dynamic moctel of the c!!Y, one that would account not only for the expansion of cities in terms of popula ion and territory but also for the patterns of settlement and land use within cities. They identified several factors that influence the physical form of cities. As Park stated, among them are "transportation and commun ication, tramways and telephones, newspapers and advertising, steel construc tion and elevators-all things, in fact, which tend to bring about at once a greater mobility and a greater concentrat ion of the urban populations." 23. Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in paragraph 2? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A.  The Chicago school of sociology founded by Park and Burgess attempted to help the population of growing cities protect the land around them. 
B.  The model that Park and Burgess created was intended to explain both why the population and area of a city like Chicago grew and in what way urban land was used or settled. 
C.  The founders of the Chicago school of sociology wanted to make Chicago a dynamic model for how other cities should use and settle their land. 
D.  Park and Burgess were concerned that cities like Chicago should follow a model of good land use as the population grew and settled new areas. 
24. The author includes the statement by Robert Park in paragraph 2 in order to 
A. establish the specific topics about which Park and Burgess may have disagreed 
B. identify the aspects of Chicago's development that required careful planning 
C. specify some of the factors that contributed to the pattern of development of cities
D. compare the definitions given by Park and Burgess for the physical form of cities.
Park and Burgess based their model of urban growth on the concept of "natural areas" that is, areas such as occupational suburbs or residential enclaves in which the population is relatively homogeneous and land is used in similar ways without deliberate planning. Park and Burgess saw urban expansion as occurring through a series of "invasions" of successive zones or areas surrounding the center of the city. For example, people from rural areas and other societies "invaded" areas where housing was inexpensive. Those areas tended to be close to the places where they worked. In turn, people who could afford better housing and the cost of commuting "invaded" areas farther from the business district. 
25. Paragraph 3 indicates that all of the following are true of "natural areas" as conceived by Park and Burgess EXCEPT: 
A.  Use of the land in natural areas follows a consistent pattern but is generally unplanned. 
B.  People living in natural areas tend to have much in common. 
C.  Natural areas are usually protected from "invasion" by people in other areas. 
D.  Natural areas are an important basic component of the model Park and Burgess developed. 
Park and Burgess's model has come to be known as the "concentric-zone model" (represented by the figure). Because the model was originally based on studies of Chicago, its center is labeled "Loop," the term commonly applied to that city's central commercial zone. Surrounding the central zone is a "zone in transition, " an area that is being invaded by business and light manufacturing. The third zone is inhabited by workers who do not want to live in the factory or business district but at the same time need to live reasonably close to where they work. The fourth or residential zone consists of upscale apartment buildings and single-family homes. And the outermost ring, outside the city limits, is the suburban or commuters' zone; its residents live within a 30-to 60-minute ride of the central business district. 
26. According to paragraph 4, why is the term "Loop" used in the concentric-zone model? 
A.  It indicates the many connections between each of the zones in the model. 
B.  It indicates that zones are often in transition and frequently changing. 
C.  It reflects the fact that the model was created with the city of Chicago in mind. 
D.  It emphasizes the fact that populations often returned to zones in which they used to live. 
Studies by Park, Burgess, and other Chicago-school sociologists showed how new groups of immigrants tended to be concentrated in separate areas within inner-city zones, where they sometimes experienced tension with other ethnic groups that had arrived earlier. Over time, however, each group was able to adjust to life in the city and to find a place for itself in the urban economy. Eventually many of the immigrants moved to unsegregated areas in outer zones; the areas they left behind were promptly occupied by new waves of immigrants. 
27. The word "promptly" in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A. quickly 
B. usually 
C. eventually 
D. easily 
The Park and Burgess model of growth in zones and natural areas of the city can still be used to describe patterns of growth in cities that were built around a central business district and that continue to attract large numbers of immigrants. But this model is biased toward the commercial and industrial cities of North America, which have tended to form around business centers rather than around palaces or cathedrals, as is often the case in some other parts of the world. Moreover, it fails to account for other patterns of urbanization, such as the rapid urbanization that occurs along commercial transportation corridors and the rise of nearby satellite cities. 
28. Paragraph 6 indicates which of the following about the application of the Park and Burgess model to modern North American cities? 
A. It is especially useful for those cities that have been used as models for international development. 
B. It remains useful in explaining the development of some urban areas but not all cities. 
C. It can be applied equally well to cities with commercial centers and those with palaces and cathedrals at their center. 
D. It is less applicable to modern cities because of changes in patterns of immigration. 
Studies by Park, Burgess, and other Chicago-school sociologists showed how new groups of immigrants tended to be concentrated in separate areas within inner-city zones, where they sometimes experienced tension with other ethnic groups that had arrived earlier. Over time, however, each group was able to adjust to life in the city and to find a place for itself in the urban economy. (A) Eventually many of the immigrants moved to unsegregated areas in outer zones; the areas they left behind were promptly occupied by new waves of immigrants. 
The Park and Burgess model of growth in zones and natural areas of the city can still be used to describe patterns of growth in cities that were built around a central business district and that continue to attract large numbers of immigrants. (B) But this model is biased toward the commercial and industrial cities of North America, which have tended to form around business centers rather than around palaces or cathedrals, as is often the case in some other parts of the world. {C) Moreover, it fails to account for other patterns of urbanizat ion, such as the rapid urbanization that occurs along commercial transportation corridors and the rise of nearby satellite cities. (D) 
29. Look at the part of the passage that is displayed above. The letters {A), {B), {C), and {D) indicate where the following sentence could be added. 
Typical of this kind of urban growt h is the steel-producing center of Gary , Indiana , outside of Chicago, which developed because massiv e heavy industry could not be locat ed within the majo r urban center itself. 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
A. Choice A 
B. Choice B 
C. Choice C
D. Choice D 
30. Directions: An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided here. 
Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some sentences do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter of your answer choice or you can copy the sentence. 
Two sociologi sts, Robert Park and Ernest Burgess, developed the "concentric-zone model" of how cities use land and grow
Answer Choices 
[A] The model was developed to explain how the city of Chicago was developing around centrally located transportation and communication systems. 
[B] The model arose out of concern for the quality of life in the rapidly growing cities of early twentieth-century America. 
[C] The founders of the model did not believe in formal city planning and instead advocated growth through the expansion of so-called "natural areas." 
[D] According to the model, a group new to the city tends to live together near the center and over time moves to outer areas that are more diverse ethnically and occupationally. 
[E] The model is applicable to cities that grow by attracting large numbers of workers to centrally located businesses. 
[F] The model predicts that eventually the inner city becomes so crowded that its residents move to new satellite cities outside the city limits.
LISTENING
This section measures your ability to understand conversations and lectures in English. 
Listen to each conversation and lecture only one time. After each conversation and lecture, you will answer some questions about it. Answer each question based on what is stated or implied by the speakers. 
You may take notes while you listen and use your notes to help you answer the questions. Your notes will not be scored. 
In some questions you will see this icon: 0 This means that you will hear, but not see, the question. 
Answer each question before moving on. Do not return to previous questions. 
It will take about 41 minutes to listen to the conversations and lectures and answer the questions about them.
Directions: Listen to Track 70. 0 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
1. What are the speakers mainly discussing? 
A. Getting financial aid for college
B. Planning a student's course schedule for the next four years 
C. Taking courses during the summer session 
D. Differences in admissions requirements between Hooper University and two other schools 
2. Why does the student want to take classes at City College? 
A. Because Hooper University does not offer the classes he wants 
B. Because City College classes cost less money than ones at Hooper University 
C. So that he can take classes on the weekend 
D. So that he can graduate from Hooper University early 
3. Why will the man probably take only two courses? 
A.  Students are limited to two summer courses. 
B.  He can attend classes only on Saturday and Sunday. 
C.  His financial aid will pay for only two courses. 
D.  His summer job will keep him from taking more than two courses. 
4. What will Ms. Brinker probably do for the man? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] Give the man a student ID number 
[B] Give the man a financial aid form 
[C] Help the man figure out which ctasses to take 
[D] Help the man apply to Hooper University 
[E] Put the man's information into the City College admission system 
5. Listen to Track 71. 0 
A.  The man waited too long to apply to City College. 
B.  The man should not attend Hooper University . 
C.  The man will be able to do what he wants to do. 
D.  The man is very unlucky. 
Directions: Listen to Track 72. 0 World History 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
6. What is the main purpose of the lecture? 
A. To compare the study of world history to the study of United States history 
B. To explain to the students their next assignment 
C. To explain different approaches to the study of world history 
D. To explain the origins of history as an academic discipline 
7. Why does the professor mention the Western-Heritage Model used in her high school? 
A. To explain why she prefers using the model 
B. To emphasize that the model was widely used in the past 
C. To correct an error in a student's description of the model 
D. To compare high school history courses to college history courses 
8. According to the professor, what is an advantage of the Different-Cultures Model? 
A. It focuses on the history of the United States. 
B. It is based upon the most widely researched theories. 
C. It includes the history of a variety of cultural groups. 
D. It makes thematic connections across different cultural groups. 
9. What aspect of Islamic civilization will the professor likely discuss in the course? 
A. A succession of Islamic rulers 
B. The ancient origins of Islamic architecture 
C. The isolation of European cultures from Islamic influence 
D. Islamic elements in African cultures
10. Match each of the topics below with the type of world history course in which it would most likely be discussed. 
Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. 
The Wes tern-Heritage I The Different- Cultures I The Patterns-of-Change Model Model Model Answer Choices 
[A] The contributions of Native American art to United States culture 
[B] The independent discovery of printing techniques in Asia and Europe 
[C] Ancient Roman foundations of the United States legal system 
11. Listen to Track 73. 0 A.  She doubts that the course will fulfill the students' expectations. 
B.  She hopes that the students selected the course because of their interest. 
C.  She is pleased that the course will fulfill the requirements. 
D.  She is worried that the students might not be familiar with the course requirements. Directions: Listen to Track 74. 0 Directions: Now answer the questions. 
12. Why does the man go to see the woman? 
A. To ask her to talk to his professor about an exam 
B. To get help completing an assignment 
C. To get help understanding why he is having trouble in his classes 
D. To ask her opinion about which class he should take 13. What does the man imply about his Spanish class? 
A.  He helps other students in the class. 
B.  He is doing well in the class. 
C.  He cannot complete all the assignments. 
D.  He needs to study more for the class. 
14. What problem does the man have with his reading assignments? 
A. He is not interested in what he reads. 
B. He cannot memorize definitions of terms. 
C. He is overwhelmed by the amount he has to read. 
D. He has difficulty identifying what is important information. 
15. Why does the woman tell the man about her own experience as a student? 
A. To make him aware that other students have similar problems 
B. To encourage him to spend more time studying at the library 
C. To explain the importance of remembering details 
D. To convince him to take a study-skills course 
16. What recommendations does the woman make about what the man should do? Choose 2 answers. 
[A] Underline definitions in the text as he reads 
[B] Write a summary of what he reads 
[C] Read the text twice 
[D] Find additional texts on his own Directions: 
Listen to Track 75. 0 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
17. What is the lecture mainly about? 
A. How astronomers found the correct interpretation for a certain observation 
B. How astronomers distinguish between two kinds of nebulae 
C. Various improvements to the telescope over the last 300 years 
D. An old problem in astronomy that remains unsolved 
18. According to the lecture, how did distant galaxies appear to eighteenth-century astronomers? 
A. Like the moons of planets 
B. Like small clouds 
C. Like variable stars 
D. Like bright points of light 
19. What could astronomers better estimate once they knew what nebulae really were? 
A. The diameter of variable stars 
B. The density of cosmic dust 
C. The size of the universe 
D. The average number of planets in a galaxy 
20. According to the professor, what did a 1920s telescope allow astronomers to do for the first time? 
A. Study the moons of Jupiter 
B. Observe gamma-ray bursters 
C. Reject the dust theory of nebulae 
D. Prove that galaxies are surprising ly small 
21. What did eighteenth-century astronomers have in common with astronomers today? 
A. They could not explain everything they detected with their instruments. 
B. They knew the correct distances of objects they could not identify. 
C. Their instruments were not powerful enough to detect spiral nebulae. 
D. They argued over the natural brightness of variable stars. 
22. Listen to Track 76. 0 
A. She is certain about the correct answer. 
B. She is now aware that her original idea had a weakness. 
C. She is not convinced that the professor is right. 
D. She thinks that the professor misunderstood what she said earlier. 
Directions: Listen to Track 77. 0 Art History 
Directions: Now answer the questions. 
23. What is the lecture mainly about? 
A. Various painting techniques 
B. Ways to determine the purpose of a piece of art 
C. How moral values are reflected in art 
D. How to evaluate a piece of art 
24. According to the professor, what did ancient Greek philosophers value in a work of art? 
A. An accurate imitation of life 
B. An unusual perspective on life 
C. The expression of complex emotions 
D. The use of symbolism 
25. Why does the professor talk about personal taste? 
A. To point out its importance in the evaluation of art 
B. To help students understand the meaning of aesthetics 
C. To show that personal taste and aesthetics are the same 
D. To help explain art from different cultures 
26. Why does the professor mention wheels and spheres? 
A. To illustrate how movement can be expressed in a piece of art 
B. To demonstrate that objects are more important than colors in a piece of art 
C. To give an example of objects that have symbolic significance 
D. To explain why some objects rarely appear in works of art 
27. The professor mentions four formal steps used in examining a piece of art. Place the steps inorder from first to last.Write your answer choices in the spaces where they belong. You can either write the letter ofyour answer choice or you can copy the sentence.
Answer Choices 
[A] Give an opinion about the piece of art. 
[B] Identify possible symbols. 
[C] Describe the piece of art. 
[D] Determine the artist's meaning. 
28.Listen to Track 78. 0
A. He will assign 12 pieces of art to evaluate.
B. He is organizing a class trip to the art museum.
C. It takes a lot of time to evaluate a piece of art.
D. Students will now be able to evaluate art quickly.
SPEAKING
This section measures your ability to speak in English about a variety of topics. 
There are four questions in this section. For each question, you will be given a short time to prepare your response. When the preparation time is up, answer the question as completely as possible in the time indicated for that question. You should record your responses so that you can review them later and compare them with the notes in the Answers section and scoring rubrics. 
1. You will now be asked to give your opinion about a familiar topic. Give yourself 15 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 45 seconds. 
Listen to Track 79. 0 
Some people enjoy watching movies or television in their spare time. Others prefer reading books or magazines. State which you prefer and explain why. 
Preparation Time: 15 seconds 
Response Time: 45 seconds 
2. You will now read a short passage and listen to a conversation on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 80. 0 
Reading Time: 45 seconds 
Plans for Campus Gym The recreational services department will receive special funding from this year's budget to increase the number of exercise machines in the campus gym. The increase is in response to numerous student complaints regarding the insufficient number of machines available. Recreational services agrees that, due to an increase in university enrollment, more students are using the gym. They, therefore, welcomed the proposal, adding that it would encourage even more students to exercise and would help to promote a healthier lifestyle among students. 
Listen to Track 81. 0 
The woman expresses her opinion about the plan described in the announcement. Briefly summarize the plan. Then state her opinion about the plan and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds 
Response Time : 60 seconds 
3. You will now read a short passage and listen to a lecture on the same topic. You will then be asked a question about them. After you hear the question, give yourself 30 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 82. 0 
Reading Time: 50 seconds 
Keystone Species Within a habitat, each species depends on other species, and contributes to the overall stability of that ecosystem. However, some species do more than others by providing essential services. Without the influence of these key species, the habitat changes significantly. Scientists refer to these important players in an ecosystem as keystone species. When a keystone species disappears from its habitat, the habitat changes dramatically. Their disappearance can then trigger the loss of other species. As some species vanish, others move in or become more abundant. The new mix of species changes the habitat's appearance and character.
Listen to Track 83. 0 
The professor gives examples of the effects of elephants on the African grasslands habitat. 
Using the examples from the talk, explain why elephants are considered a keystone species. 
Preparation Time: 30 seconds 
Response Time: 60 seconds 
4. You will now listen to part of a lecture. You will then be asked a question about it. After you hear the question, give yourself 20 seconds to prepare your response. Then record yourself speaking for 60 seconds. 
Listen to Track 84. 0 
Using the examples mentioned by the professor, describe two ways that writers create emphasis when writing dialogue. 
Preparation Time: 20 seconds Response Time: 60 seconds 
WRITING
This section measures your ability to write in English to communicat e in an academic environm ent. 
There are two writing questions in this section. 
For question 1, you will read a passage and listen to a lecture about the same topic. You may take notes while you read and listen. Then you will write a response to a question bas ed on what you have read and heard. You may look back at the passage when answering the question. You may use your notes to help you answer the question. You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. 
For question 2, you will write an essay based on your own knowledge and experience. You have 30 minutes to plan and complete your essay. 
Directions: Give yourself 3 minutes to read the passage. 
Reading Time: 3 minutes
Soon technology will provide smart cars: cars that virtually drive themselves. A computer in the car determines the speed and route to the desired destination. The computer is in continuous contact with a global positioning system and other technologies that will provide extremely accurate information about the location of the car, other cars on the road, congestion, accidents, and so forth. The human driver will be little more than a passenger. Smart cars promise to make driving safer, quicker, and less expensive. 
First of all, smart cars will prevent many accidents, thereby saving lives. The cars will be equipped with a variety of sensors that very accurately detect cars and other obstacles in their path, and they will have automatic programs that control braking and turning to avoid collisions. Given the hundreds of accidents that occur on highways daily, it is clear that humans do a poor job of avoiding accidents and that computer control would be a great improvement. 
Second, with the wide use of smart cars, traffic problems will practically disappear. These computer-controlled cars can follow each other closely, even at high speeds. This ability will result in increased highway speeds. Today commuting by car can take hours a day. So the increased speed of smart cars will be a great benefit, welcomed by the many people who commute by car. 
Finally, smart cars will bring a reduction in the costs of driving. Because smart cars are programmed to drive the most direct routes, car owners will have to spend less money on repairs and replacement parts. Expensive items such as brakes, tires, and transmissions will last much longer in smart cars than in other cars. 
Listen to Track 85. 0 
Writing Directions: You have 20 minutes to plan and write your response. Your response will be judged on the basis of the quality of your writing and on how well your response presents the points in the lecture and their relationship to the reading passage. Typically, an effective response will be 150 to 225 words. 
Listen to Track 86. 0 
Response Time: 20 minutes Summarize the points made in the lecture, being sure to explain how they challenge specific points made in the reading passage. 
Directions: Read the question below. You have 30 minutes to plan, write, and revise your essay. Typically, an effective response will contain a minimum of 300 words. 
Response Time: 30 minutes 
Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? 
A person should never make an important decision alone . 
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. Be sure to use your own words. Do not use memorized examples. 
ANSWERS
Reading Section 
1. C  
2. D
3. B 
4. D
5. B  
6. D 
7. A
8. C  
9. B 
10. A,C, D 
Human s but not BOTH Human
A set of vocal cords 
A brain with a cortex
The ability to use tools
The ability to learn by observation
11. D 
12. C
13. A 
14. c 
15. B 
16. c 
17. B 
18. A 
19. B 
20. B A,C, E
21. C 
22. A 
23. B 
24. C 
25. C 
26. C 
27. A 
28. B 
29. D 
30. B, D, E 
Listening Section 
1. C 10. C,A, B 
2. D 11. B 
3. A 12. C 
4. A, E 13. B 
5. C 14. D 
6. C 15. A 
7. B 16. B,C 
8. C 17. A 
9. D 18. B 19. C 
20. C 
21. A 
22. B 
23. D 
24. A 
25. B 
26. C 
27. C, B, D, A 
28. C 
Speaking Section 
1. To respond to this particular question, you should clearly state what your opinion is: Do you prefer to watch movies or television in your spare time or do you prefer to read books or magazines? Then you should give reasons to support your opinion. If you prefer to watch movies or television, you might give the reason that you enjoy the visual nature of films, and that you particularly enjoy seeing other places shown in films. You might then describe a particular film that you have enjoyed, such as a travel film, and say that these films inspire you to do your own traveling. 
If you say that you prefer reading books or magazines, you might say that you prefer to imagine something that you read yourself, rather than seeing a movie of it. You could say that you are often disappointed when you see a movie that was based on a book because you had imagined the scenes and characters differently and this is why you prefer to read. You may develop this further by describing a particular film and book. 
Keep in mind that there is no "correct" answer to this question. Whatever your preference is, your answer should be supported with examples. It is important to make sure that you state your opinion and develop your response with good examples and relevant details. 
Your response should be intelligible, should demonstrate effective use of grammar and vocabulary, and should be well developed and coherent. Your response is scored using the Independent Speaking Rubric (see Appendix A). 
2. First, as the question states, you should provide a brief summary of the university's plan, which is to increase the number of exercise machines in the gym. 
You can also provide a brief summary of the reasons that they're doing this: 1) fewer machines are available because of increased student enrollment, and 2) it will encourage more students to exercise. You should not spend too much time on this summa ry; if you attempt to provide many details from the reading, you may not have enough time: to discuss both of the woman's reasons for disagreeing with the proposal. For this item type, a brief summary is all that is necessary. You should make sure that your summary is clear enough for the listener to understand the proposal without having access to additional information. 
After the summary, you should state the woman's opinion of the university's plan to add exercise machines. In this case, the woman disagrees with the university's plan. 
You should then convey the two main reasons she gives for holding that opinion. You will need to connect information from the conversation to the reading in order for the response to be complete. The woman disagrees with the first point about fewer machines being available. She says even though she does see more people in the gym, she does not have to wait to use the equipment. 
Your response should also convey the woman's second reason for not agreeing with the university's plan. She thinks that adding new machines would not encourage more people to exercise. She says that the university already provides enough opportunities for students to exercise and have a healthy lifestyle. For example, there's a swimming pool, running paths, and sport teams. 
Your response should be intelligible, should demonstrate effective use of grammar and vocabulary , and should be well developed and coherent. Your response is scored using the Integrated Speaking Rubric (see Appendix A). 
3. To respond to this particular question you should first explain the concept of keystone species as it was presented in the reading. You can talk about this as it relates to the elephant. Keystone species are important because the habitat they live in would change dramatically without them. Elephants living in grassland habitats in Africa are an example of a keystone species. 
You should then discuss the professor's examples. Note that you do not need to repeat all of the details from the reading and the lecture, but instead integrate points from both to answer the question completel y. 
As one example of how the grasslands habitat would change without elephants, the professor says that elephants eat or destroy tree and shrub seeds and small plants, preventing many trees from growing in the grasslands. If they did not remove these trees, many trees would block sunshine, so grasses would die. The trees would eventuall y replace grasses, and the forest would replace the grasslands. 
The professor discusses another way that the lack of elephants would impact the habitat. He says that other animals in this habitat depend on grasses for food and survival. When grasses die, these animals leave the habitat and new species move into the habitat. Both of these examples show why the elephant is a keystone species. 
This is an example of a possible response. There are other effective ways to organize your answer. The most important thing is to discuss the specific information that is asked for in the question. Listeners should understand that elephants are considered a keystone species because they have an important effect on their environment and it would change greatly without them. The details you choose to discuss from the reading and the lecture should lead to this understanding. 
Your response should be intelligible, should demonstrate effective use of grammar and vocabulary, and should be well developed and coherent. Your response is scored using the Integrated Speaking Rubric (see Appendix A).
4. This particular question requires you to summarize the contents of a lecture you hear. In your response, you should talk about the two ways that writers create emphasis when writing dialogue. The professor says that exaggeration and understatement are two ways to create emphasis or impact. 
After your general introduction, you should then talk about the first way that writers can create emphasis. The professor says that exaggeration can create impact or emphasis by describing something as bigger or more than it is. For example, a character in a story who is tired from a long walk might say, "I can't take another step" instead of saying "I'm tired." This exaggeration is more forceful and interesting. 
You should then talk about the second way to create emphasis. The professor sa ys that with understatement you can create emphasis by saying less than you mean. For example, the professor complimented her friend on a great meal by saying that it was "not bad." Using understat ement makes for a stronger statement. 
You should make sure that you leave yourself enough time to talk about the second example. You will be expected to cover both examples. 
Your response should be intelligible, should demonstrate effective use of grammar and vocabular y, and should be well developed and coherent. Your response is scored using the Integrated Speaking Rubric (see Appendix A). 
Writing Section 
1. What is important to understand from the lecture is that the professor disagrees with the advantages of smart cars presented in the reading, namely that smart cars will reduce the number of accidents; that smart cars will reduce commuting times; and that smart cars will save their owners money. 
In your response, you should convey the reasons presented by the professor for why smart cars will not produce the benefits predicted in the reading. A high-scoring response will include the following points made by the professor that cast doubt on the points made in the reading: 
Point made in the reading 
Since smart cars will be equipped with sophisticated technology to detect obstacles and control braking and turning, many accidents that human drivers cause today will be prevented. 
Commuting time for many people will be reduced because smart cars will be able to travel at greater speeds and closer together. 
Smart cars will be able to choose the most direct routes. With less distance traveled, smart car owners will save money on repair and part replacement costs. 
Counterpoint made in the lecture 
Technologies used in smart cars will fail occasionally, as all technologies do. Since smart cars will travel at greater speeds and closer together, such technology failures will result in accidents that will be more serious than accidents caused nowadays by human drivers. 
Every improvement in driving convenience usually results in more people taking to the road. The introduction of smart cars will likely result in more cars on the road, which will cause additional traffic congestion. Commutin g time is therefore not likely to decrease. 
Sophisticated technologies used by smart cars will make the cars more expensive to buy and also more expensive to repair. These added costs will offset the savings identified in the reading. 
Your response is scored using the Integrated Writing Rubric (see Appendix A). A response that receives a score of 5 clearly conveys all three of the main points in the table using accurate sentence structure and vocabulary. 
2. To earn a top score, you should develop a multi-paragraph essay that responds to the issue of whether you believe a person should never make an important decision alone. Typically an effective response will contain a minimum of 300 words. 
There are a number of ways to approach this topic. One way would be to describe a number of important decisions that have already been made or will likely have to be made by you or by an unspecified person who represents a group (for example, college students). You could then go on to discuss reasons why these decisions are better made alone. Alternatively, you could discuss why input from others is helpful in decision-making; one reason for this could be that the experiences that others have had can help guide you. Or you could describe different kinds of decisions and explain why some of them should involve getting help from others, and why other kinds are best made by you alone. 
Keep in mind that there is no "correct" answer to this question. Either or both sides of the issue can be supported with examples and reasons. It is important to make sure that you state your opinion and develop a response that explains your opinion. The development of your essay is judged by how effectively you support your opinion; a well-developed essay will contain clearly appropriate reasons, examples, and details that illustrate your opinion. Development is not evaluated simply in terms of how many words you write. 
Your response should be well organized. A well-organized essay allows an evaluator to read from the beginning to the end of the essay without becoming confused. You should be sure not to just repeat the same information in different ways. 
The quality and accuracy of the sentence structure and vocabulary you use to express your ideas is also very important. 
Your response is scored using the Independent Writing Rubric (see Appendix A). 